VETERINARY PRACTICE GUIDELINES

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines for Dogs
and Cats
Ravinder Dhaliwal, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology), DABVP (Canine and Feline)†, Elizabeth Boynton, DVM,
Sheila Carrera-Justiz, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology), Nicole Cruise, CVT, Mary Gardner, DVM,
Janice Huntingford, DVM, DACVSMR, MS, CVPP, CVA, Heidi Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC,
Elizabeth Rozanski, DVM, DACVECC, DACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)

ABSTRACT
Veterinary professionals are taught to recognize that “old age is not a disease.” However, clients may have the perception that
older dogs and cats undergo an unavoidable physical, mental, and behavioral decline attributable simply to old age. The veterinary team’s role includes providing medical care and support to senior pets to maintain their quality of life, as well as supporting
and educating clients on proper senior animal care and addressing any misconceptions about the aging process. These Guidelines describe a systematic approach to the healthcare of the senior pet that is based on an evidence-guided assessment of
both healthy and unhealthy canine and feline patients. By using evidence-guided medicine, which may include conventional
and integrative approaches as well as environmental management for the senior pet, the patient’s quality of life can be
enhanced and potentially extended during this vulnerable life stage. Developing a senior program for the veterinary practice
requires appropriate training of the entire healthcare team and includes a robust client education program that focuses on the
wellbeing of the senior pet. Palliative and hospice care should be included in the education and information provided for both
the veterinary team and the families of senior pets. (J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2023; 59:1–21. DOI 10.5326/JAAHA-MS-7343)

AFFILIATIONS
MedVet Silicon Valley Veterinary Specialists, San Jose, California (R.D.);

setting. Evidence-guided support for speciﬁc recommendations has

Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California (E.B.); University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida (S.C.-J.); Northcentral Technical College,

tions are based on practical clinical experience and a consensus of

Wausau, Wisconsin (N.C.); Lap of Love, Jupiter, Florida (M.G.); Essex Animal

recommendations. Drug approvals and labeling are current at the time

Hospital, Essex, Ontario, Canada (J.H.); Cibolo Creek Veterinary Hospital,

of writing but may change over time. Because each case is different,

Kerrville, Texas (H.L.); Department of Clinical Sciences, Tufts Cummings
School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachusetts (E.R.)

veterinarians must base their decisions on the best available scientiﬁc
evidence in conjunction with their own knowledge and experience.

CONTRIBUTING REVIEWERS

The 2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines are generously supported by

Kathleen Cooney, DVM, CHPV, CCFP (Caring Pathways, Berthoud,

Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health, CareCredit, IDEXX, and Zoetis.

Colorado); Lynn Hendrix, DVM, CHPV (Beloved Pet Mobile Vet, World
Veterinary Palliative Medicine Organization, Davis, California)
Correspondence: ravinder.dhaliwal@medvet.com (R.D.)
† R. Dhaliwal is the chair of the AAHA Senior Care Guidelines Task Force.

been cited whenever possible and appropriate. Other recommendaexpert opinion. Further research is needed to document some of these

AAHA would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr. Lynn Hendrix’s additional contribution of developmental editing of this guideline.
The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
BCS (body condition score); CADES (CAnine DEmentia Scale); CCD

These guidelines were prepared by a task force of experts convened
by the American Animal Hospital Association. This document is

(canine cognitive dysfunction); DISHAA (Disorientation, alterations in

intended as a guideline only, not an AAHA standard of care. These

ing and other learned behaviors, altered Activity levels, and increased

guidelines and recommendations should not be construed as dictating

Anxiety); FCD (feline cognitive dysfunction); GOLPP (geriatric onset

an exclusive protocol, course of treatment, or procedure. Variations in

laryngeal paralysis polyneuropathy); IRIS (International Renal Interest

practice may be warranted based on the needs of the individual

Society); LBM (lean body mass); MER (maintenance energy require-

patient, resources, and limitations unique to each individual practice

ments); QOL (quality of life)

© 2023 by American Animal Hospital Association

social Interactions, changes in Sleep-wake cycles, loss of House train-

JAAHA.ORG

1

Introduction

senior pet healthcare. The text cites various previously published

For both canine and feline patients, veterinarians should view the

clinical guidelines on speciﬁc topics such as dentistry, pain manage-

pet’s senior years as distinct from other life stages. The senior dog or

ment, anesthesia, nutrition, and end-of-life care that practitioners

cat requires a tailored healthcare plan including preventive, diagnos-

can refer to for in-depth recommendations appropriate for the senior

tic, and treatment protocols that are speciﬁc to the aging animal’s

dog or cat.

physiologic needs. In addition, families with older pets may have a

A focus on senior pet care has many beneﬁts for veterinary

strong bond of affection and interdependence that may not be mea-

practices and their clients. These include strengthening the human-

sured in monetary terms and should be considered in the overall

animal bond, enhancing and extending the patient’s quality and

healthcare plan. A useful perspective for the veterinary team may

duration of life, and deepening the veterinary/client/patient

include the following considerations:

relationship.

 For many clients, their pets’ senior years are as important and meaningful as the sum of all the preceding life stages.
 Managing the health and wellbeing of the aging pet is an important
aspect of clinical practice.

Defining the Senior Patient
The term “senior” is used to describe the older, aging pet. Because of

Healthcare decisions affecting the older pet may be clinically

the variability in aging based on species and breed, there is no spe-

challenging for the veterinarian and may be affected by the physical,

ciﬁc age for senior status. Moreover, the criteria for senior age status

psychosocial, emotional, or spiritual needs of the pet’s family. Optimal

differ for dogs and cats. The 2019 AAHA Canine Life Stage Guide-

care of the senior pet involves a multifaceted approach, including

lines deﬁne senior as “the last 25% of estimated lifespan through end

diagnostics, medical and interventional therapies, pain management,

of life.”1 The 2021 AAHA/AAFP Feline Life Stage Guidelines and the

nutrition, dentistry, anesthesia, modifying the environmental setting,

2021 AAFP Feline Senior Care Guidelines deﬁne senior as cats greater

managing behavioral problems, and recognizing and managing

than 10 yr of age.2,3

comorbidities. Senior care also includes educating and planning for

Additional descriptive terms may be used to describe a senior

end-of-life care for the patient and supporting the caregivers and fam-

pet’s condition, such as “frailty,” “immunosenescence,” and

ily in this process. The Guidelines include a comprehensive table,

“inﬂammaging.” Frailty is a syndrome seen with advancing age ini-

organized by body system, which presents diagnostic approaches for

tially described in people, in which the patient has a decreased func-

commonly encountered diseases of senior dogs and cats. The Guide-

tional reserve that leads to a decline in physiological and cognitive

lines also include a table of common diagnostic tests and recom-

performance and a greater vulnerability to adverse medical out-

mended frequencies for senior patients and home care tips for clients.

comes.4 Scoring systems exist for assessment of frailty in dogs, and

These Guidelines represent the recommendations of a task force

increased frailty scores may be a risk factor for death, although more

of experts with decades of collective experience in caring for aging

studies are needed.4,5 Feline phenotype and index-based frailty scales

canine and feline patients. The authors have organized the Guide-

are also available.3

lines into three principal sections:
 Evaluating and managing the healthy senior pet.
 Evaluating and managing the unhealthy senior pet, which includes
an end-of-life section.
 Developing education for both veterinary teams and clients that
emphasizes the care and wellbeing of the senior pet.

These Guidelines offer recommendations that can assist practices in developing additional education resources that highlight personalized senior pet care. This approach can promote:
 Expertise and consistent messaging in senior care among the veterinary team.
 Client education that creates awareness of “best practices in senior
pet care” for maintaining the health of older dogs and cats.
 Involvement of the entire veterinary team in educating clients on
the health and quality of life (QOL) of senior pets.

Aging may have multiple biochemical changes that are noticeable only in the later stages of the age-related change. Earlier identiﬁcation of age-related changes may improve the quality and quantity
of life, but additional research is needed to detect those early biochemical changes and be able to use them as screening tests. Immunosenescence is the process of immune dysfunction that occurs with
age. Immunosenescence involves the remodeling of lymphoid organs,
leading to changes in the immune function of the elderly, which is
closely related to the development of infections, autoimmune diseases, and malignant tumors.6 Evidence for this phenomenon has
been reported in human medicine, but there is limited evidence in
veterinary medicine. Inﬂammaging is another concept reported in
human medicine, which posits that the rate of aging and age-related
disease may be due to a chronic progressive proinﬂammatory pheno-

The Guidelines are not intended to be all-inclusive in their rec-

type.7 The occurrence of immunosenescence and inﬂammaging in

ommendations, but to present an evidence-guided framework for

dogs and cats has yet to be validated and should be considered as

2

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

hypothetical concepts in veterinary medicine until further evidence

this information unless they have built a trusted relationship with

emerges.

the clinician. Clients may believe that some products are safe simply

Evaluating the Healthy Senior Pet

ents about the challenges and risks of using herbal, nutraceutical, or

because they are labeled as “natural.” Veterinarians must educate cliThe initial intake at an ofﬁce visit is essential for setting a welcoming

other therapies that may include lack of purity and potency certiﬁca-

and senior-friendly tone. Starting with an open-ended question like

tions as well as potential toxicity, drug interactions, and potential

“What brings you and Harvey here today?” is a good way to initiate a

injury.

conversation about the pet’s health and wellbeing. Eliciting a thor-

A thorough physical examination can elicit more information

ough history and gaining an understanding of the senior pet’s envi-

as the next step in a senior pet appointment. A relaxed animal in a

ronment and background are crucial to establishing a relationship

comfortable environment allows for a more accurate examination

with the client and pet. Often there are issues not mentioned when

including detailed attention to the eyes and mouth, as well as palpa-

the appointment was made that are best brought forward early in the

tion of the spine, neck, joints, musculature, digits, abdomen, and

visit. Older animals often come with a substantial list of concerns,

thoracic auscultation. When assessing musculoskeletal pain, mobility,

which the client and veterinarian can mutually discuss and prioritize.8

and movement, checklists can be used as a screening tool and may

The client may share additional crucial information about their

provide additional information for both client and veterinarian.

senior pet if they are supported with empathy. A thorough history

Chronic pain scales are a useful tool to assess musculoskeletal pain.11

can provide important information to assess the pet’s health and

For additional information on assessing chronic pain, see the 2022

may include exploring the patient’s eating and drinking habits, exer-

AAHA Pain Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats.12 Client vid-

cise, movement, play behavior, eliminations, attitude, grooming,

eos of their animal moving in their environment are additional use-

vision, and hearing. Inquiring about any changes or disruptions in

ful tools to assess musculoskeletal pain, mobility, and movement.

the household may also elicit crucial information.

Videos of the pet ambulating or jumping can help detect early neu-

A critical aspect of a patient’s history is establishing what phar-

ropathic or musculoskeletal disease.

maceuticals, supplements, nutraceuticals, creams, oils, or other ther-

A senior pet appointment may address issues such as decreased

apeutics are currently being given to the pet. This is important to

mobility from osteoarthritis, metabolic issues such as kidney or liver

evaluate the need for additional therapeutics and minimize drug

disease, and functional issues such as heart disease or neoplasia. For

interactions, and it is part of building a trusted relationship between

mobility issues, older animals may beneﬁt from the use of pet-

client and veterinarian. Drug interactions may result in serious tox-

friendly techniques (low-stress handling, softened table examination

icities, negate the effect of medications, or create a physical change

surfaces or examining the pet off the table), as pain and distress may

that would be detrimental to the animal (e.g., a nonsteroidal anti-

be more common for senior animals.13,14 Mobility may be reduced

inﬂammatory drug given to an animal currently taking steroids,

owing to arthritic changes, and care must be taken to gently manipu-

resulting in gastrointestinal bleeding). Practitioners may need to

late limbs, joints, musculature, neck, and spine to explore underlying

evaluate any nutraceuticals the pet is currently on for potential inter-

discomfort. Unlike dogs, cats rarely have crepitus in affected joints.

actions (e.g., turmeric, which is touted as an anti-inﬂammatory aid,

However, studies have indicated that more than 60% of cats have

yet has been shown to cause gastrointestinal ulceration in humans

osteoarthritis in at least one joint despite absence of this physical

9,10

and mice).

Additional examples include melatonin products

examination ﬁnding.11–13,15

made with xylitol and nutraceuticals like St. John’s Wort, turmeric

Neoplasia is more commonly found with senior pets and may

(major component curcumin), ginseng, s-adenosyl-methionine, mel-

be indicated from a thorough physical examination. Cutaneous

atonin, and tryptophan that increase 5-hydroxytryptophan and can

masses noted on physical examination should be measured in all

contribute to serotonin syndrome. Serotonin syndrome may occur

three dimensions, aspirated, and cytologically examined. Clinically,

with these nutraceuticals if the animal is also medicated with drugs

neoplasms such as mast cell tumors may be indistinguishable from

commonly used in senior patients, including selective serotonin

benign growths (e.g., ubiquitous lipomas) and they may coexist,

reuptake inhibitors such as ﬂuoxetine, tricyclic antidepressants such

making the “watch and see” approach risky. A thorough, gentle

as clomipramine and amitriptyline, monoamine oxidase inhibitors

abdominal and rectal palpation may also provide an early indication

such as selegiline or L-deprenyl, azapirones such as buspirone, anti-

of abnormalities. Special attention should be given to the oral cavity,

depressants such as trazadone, and phenylpiperidine opioids such as

eye, and digits as sites of potential neoplasia.

fentanyl and tramadol. Clients using cannabis products or other

A medical workup is also recommended for senior pets once or

nontraditional therapies for their pets may be reluctant to disclose

twice a year and may include a complete blood count, chemistry, and

JAAHA.ORG

3

urinalysis, as well as diagrams or photographs to better track changes

induction. Other considerations for anesthesia with a senior pet may

and screening biomarkers such as symmetric dimethylarginine assay,

include titrating doses of anesthetic agents as lower doses may be

N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide, and C-reactive protein. It

needed. Postprocedural analgesics should be prescribed as indicated

may also include other tests listed in Table 1, Diagnostic Tests and

by the procedure; consider that the dose needed for opioids and other

Recommended Frequencies for Senior Dogs and Cats.

analgesics may be different for senior pets. Validated pain scales can
be very useful for postoperative analgesia care.12

Anesthetic and Surgical Considerations
Practitioners will ﬁnd the 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and Monitoring
Guidelines for Dogs and Cats to be a useful, comprehensive supplement to this section of the Senior Care Guidelines.16
Senior pets may require general anesthesia for surgical and nonsurgical procedures, such as dental care, to treat ailments and/or
improve their QOL. Advanced age alone is not a contraindication to
general anesthesia. Senior pets can safely undergo multiple anesthetic
events if necessary. Medication choices and other precautions should
be considered to minimize the risk for the pet. Because clients may
have additional anxiety about anesthesia for their senior pet, the role
of the veterinarian and technician includes reassuring the client of
the indication for and safety of the procedure.
An anesthetic evaluation should include a preoperative physical
examination, focusing on diseases that may increase risk. In addition
to the physical examination, preoperative laboratory tests should be
performed, with a speciﬁc focus on renal (creatinine) and cardiac
function (N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide). Imaging,
including radiographs and ultrasonography, may also be indicated.

From a surgical standpoint, the beneﬁt to quality or quantity of
life should be established with the client before surgery is performed.
Many surgeries, including dental procedures, can result in substantial
improvement in QOL. However, perhaps the biggest predictor of
postsurgical QOL is preprocedure function; for example, a healthy,
robust 15 yr old terrier would be expected to recover quickly from a
mass removal, whereas a 13 yr old Labrador mixed-breed dog with
geriatric onset laryngeal paralysis polyneuropathy (GOLPP), severe
osteoarthritis, and International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) stage 3
renal disease may require a longer recovery time.68
The surgeon should be experienced with the procedure and/or
have adequate training in similar techniques. All necessary equipment should be prepared and potential surgical needs anticipated
(e.g., implant, speciﬁc instrument). For senior pets, recovery times
are improved with speed of the procedure and meticulous focus by
the surgeon. Perioperative antibiotics and pain management should
be provided if indicated. Postprocedural return to function is
enhanced with appropriate analgesics, and physical therapy/rehabilitation may also lead to a more rapid return to function.

Preoperative care may include preprocedural IV ﬂuids in a patient
with compromised renal function, where fasting or anxiety associated

Dentistry

with hospitalization may decrease normal water consumption. Preox-

The 2019 AAHA Dental Care Guidelines for Dogs and Cats provide a

ygenation may be recommended for patients with cardiovascular or

comprehensive supplement to this section of the Senior Care Guide-

pulmonary illnesses.

lines.17 Senior pets may have an increased risk for oral cavity issues,

Induction, maintenance, and monitoring anesthesia are also sig-

such as periodontal disease and oral neoplasia. They should be

niﬁcant, and checklists and anesthetic forms may be used to mini-

assessed with a good oral examination, especially if the patient has

mize risk and complications. A dedicated, trained technician with a

trouble prehending or chewing or swallowing food or shows discom-

checklist can focus on monitoring anesthesia and be prepared for

fort during the process. The oral cavity and pharynx should be thor-

any potential complications associated with either the individual

oughly examined for the presence of periodontal disease, oral

patient or speciﬁc risks associated with the procedure. Checklists can

tumors, or dental disease (including broken or resorbing teeth).

be comprehensive and may include handling of the pet, padding for

Examination of the oral cavity should be done at every veterinary

the animal, monitoring tools, surgical needs such as blood product

visit. Videos taken by the client of unusual eating practices by the pet

availability if hemorrhage is a potential complication, preoperative

can help assess the problem.

and postoperative analgesia and other indicated medications, a vali-

The incidence of periodontal disease is increased in smaller and

dated pain scale that is species speciﬁc, and a postoperative plan

older dogs.18 Tiny and small senior dogs may have signiﬁcant peri-

and patient discharge instructions. To lessen mobility complications,

odontal bone loss, which may result in pathologic fractures. Small

senior pets should be kept warm, handled gently, placed in a com-

senior pets may have a higher incidence of pathologic fracture in the

fortable position, and kept on a well-padded surgical or treatment

mandibles, due to increased bone loss and less dense bone. The gen-

table. To minimize the time of anesthesia for the pet, it is recom-

eral systemic health of a senior may also be affected by the presence

mended that the surgeon be readily available at the time of anesthesia

of a chronic inﬂammatory process such as periodontitis.19

4

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

TABLE 1
Diagnostic Tests and Recommended Frequencies for Senior Dogs and Cats

Diagnostic Test

Recommended Frequency
Canine

Feline

Fecal testing for parasites

1–4 times/yr, depending on use of
preventive products and lifestyle.

1–2 times/yr, depending on health and
lifestyle factors.

Tick-borne disease

Annually

N/A

Heartworm

Annually

Detailed information on heartworm
testing is available in the American
Heartworm Society guidelines.1

Comprehensive CBC (including

Every 6–12 mo.

pathologist review if necessary)
Chemistry (TP, albumin, ALT, glucose,
BUN, creatinine, sodium, potassium,
calcium, SDMA if available)

Every 6–12 mo.

Urinalysis (USG, sediment, glucose,
ketones, bilirubin, protein, occult
blood)

Every 6–12 mo.

Imaging

Imaging of a region of interest should be
performed if clinically indicated. Breedspecific screening may be appropriate.

Electrocardiogram

Perform an electrocardiogram annually in breeds with high risk of cardiac disease
(e.g., boxers, Dobermans), or in other patients when clinically indicated or if an
arrhythmic condition is suspected.

Urine protein:creatinine ratio

If proteinuria is identified or persistent microalbuminuria is present.

Thyroxine (T4)

Recommended annually.

Strongly recommended annually.

Blood pressure

Recommended annually.

Strongly recommended annually.
Recommended every 6–12 mo in
healthy geriatric cats.

Retroviral testing

N/A

Consider based on individual
patient’s risk.

NT-proBNP

Annually and to be strongly considered before an anesthetic event.

Imaging of a region of interest should be
performed if clinically indicated.

1 American Heartworm Society. Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management of Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) Infection in Cats. American Heartworm

Society, 2020. Available at https://d3ft8sckhnqim2.cloudfront.net/images/pdf/2020_AHS_Feline_Guidelines_Summary_11_12.pdf?1605556516
ALT: alanine aminotransferase
BUN: blood urea nitrogen
CBC: complete blood count
N/A: not applicable
NT-proBNP: N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide
SDMA: symmetric dimethylarginine assay
TP: total protein
USG: urine specific gravity

JAAHA.ORG

5

Anesthesia is necessary to provide adequate oral and dental care

(MER) generally decrease over a dog’s lifetime. MER decrease in cats

for any canine or feline patient. Because of their advanced age and

up to age 10, after which they start to increase.25–27 However, pub-

possible physiologic deﬁcits, senior pets undergoing anesthesia

lished data on the effects of age on energy requirements are

should receive special attention as discussed in the preceding section

extremely variable in cats. Calorie-restrictive diets have been shown

on anesthesia.

to increase dogs’ longevity,28 with an ideal body condition score

Dental radiographs are recommended to assess the extent and

(BCS) of 4.5 to 5 out of 9. A cat’s ideal BCS, up to 6 out of 9, can be

pattern of bone loss and conﬁrm appropriate extractions. Radio-

associated with increased longevity, with underweight cats having

graphs may uncover unanticipated dental or periodontal disease

greater morbidity and mortality risks.29

requiring additional treatment,20,21 but these procedures may need

Senior cats may be less able to digest and utilize nutrients.

to be staged to avoid excessive length of procedures and time under

Decreased food digestibility may contribute to weight and muscle

anesthesia.

loss. Proteins are less digestible in 20% of cats older than 11 yr, and

Periodontal disease incidence is lower in cats than in dogs.

fats are less digestible in up to 33% of cats.30 Food digestibility may

Senior cats are less likely to develop conditions such as feline chronic

be less of an issue with dogs.31,32 In a recent study, adding moisture

gingivostomatitis, more often seen in younger pets, but the presence

to foods increased the digestibility of nutrients in senior dogs.33

of tooth resorption can cause discomfort and may require
22

intervention.

Reduced protein synthesis and increased turnover of proteins
may contribute to the loss of lean body mass (LBM) in senior pets.34

Oral tumors are more common in older dogs and cats and may

Sarcopenia is the anticipated loss of LBM with age, with up to 33%

be large at the time of diagnosis because of the occult nature of can-

loss in cats from 10 to 15 yr of age.30 Dogs tend to lose LBM and

cer. Early detection is key to better outcomes. Diagnosis of the tumor

gain fat as seniors and incur overall weight loss with advanced age.35

type will help formulate a treatment plan, which may include, but is

Senior pets, particularly cats, may need up to 50% more protein to

not limited to, en bloc excision, aggressive resection, radiation ther-

improve or slow muscle loss.34 Cachexia may also be present and

apy, and adjuvant cytotoxic or immunotherapy. Cats tend to develop

refers to weight loss with excessive LBM loss due to severe or chronic

oral squamous cell carcinomas that may be located in the gingiva,

disease, such as chronic kidney disease, heart disease, and neoplasia.

tongue, or tonsils. Although locally very aggressive, these tumors

Senior pets may also develop obesity, which is more common

tend to be slow to metastasize to the lymph nodes or other loca-

in dogs. Increased BCS and obesity are known to affect mobility and

tions.23 Dogs more commonly develop oral melanocytic tumors that

contribute to inﬂammatory processes and diseases. Poor mobility

behave aggressively locally and show higher rates of distant

and decreased activity are assessed in frailty scores and are associated

metastasis.23

with a shorter time to death.36

For more advanced or complex oral disease, consider a referral
to a board-certiﬁed veterinary dentist. If referring a patient with

Healthy Senior Nutrition

complex disease is not possible, consider staging procedures to mini-

The Association of American Feed Control Ofﬁcials does not cur-

mize anesthetic risk. Often, resolution of oral and dental issues in

rently have guidelines for senior nutrition. However, senior dogs

our senior dogs and cats can greatly improve their QOL, making the

have decreased MER and need less caloric density and more ﬁber to

risks worth the beneﬁts.

optimize BCS. A senior diet may include mild increases in protein
content and quality to compensate for LBM loss.37 Healthy senior
cats may require higher-caloric-density, higher-protein diets with

Nutrition
Diet and Body Condition
The 2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines for
Dogs and Cats provide comprehensive recommendations for canine

increased digestibility and enhanced palatability fed in smaller
amounts more frequently to help them maintain adequate muscle
and body weight.34

and feline nutritional management.24 Senior pets may have changing
energy and nutrition requirements and may experience muscle or

Evaluating the Unhealthy Senior Pet

overall weight loss due to changes in the senior body such as immu-

Senior pets are at greater risk for illness to occur in their ﬁnal years,

nosenescence, inﬂammaging, or a disease process. Evaluation of

although the incidence and mortality for all diseases combined have

muscle and body condition scores can help monitor normal aging

shifted over time primarily due to improved preventive medicine

and age-related disease changes and determine when nutritional

measures, diagnostic advances, better nutrition, and greater access to

adjustment may be needed. Maintenance energy requirements

veterinary health care.

6

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

Prevention and screening for chronic diseases are discussed in

by clients in the earlier stages. Early recognition of this condition is

the section “Evaluating the Healthy Senior Pet” and can establish a

crucial as treatment is more effective in the earlier stages of CCD,

baseline for healthy senior pet care. When disease does occur in

and this condition may signiﬁcantly affect the quality of the human-

senior pets, the history, physical examination, and diagnostic tools

animal bond.40

can help establish a diagnosis and determine a course for care. Inter-

The pathophysiology of CCD is similar to Alzheimer disease in

preting diagnostic tests and reaching a clinical diagnosis should be

people. Beta amyloid plaques are seen in both, most commonly as

congruent with clinical presentation, laboratory values, imaging, his-

insoluble beta amyloid, but there are also soluble forms. In addition,

topathology, and epidemiology.

Tau neuroﬁbrillary tangles may play a role in FCD but do not appear

Common clinical signs of chronic disease may include malaise,

to play a role in CCD. There are other structural abnormalities, such

progressive lethargy, behavior changes, hyporexia, anorexia, altered

as blood vessel ﬁbrosis, ventricular enlargement, cerebral atrophy,

thirst pattern, weight loss over time, mobility alterations, and nonheal-

astroglia hypertrophy and hyperplasia, microhemorrhages, and intra-

ing wounds. A suspected chronic disease can often be presumptively

neuronal accumulation of several substances, including lipofuscin

diagnosed based on the client’s account of the pet’s history and physical

and ubiquitin. Mitochondrial dysfunction also plays a role.39

examination, although it is recommended to perform appropriate clini-

The clinical signs for CCD may resemble other intracranial

copathological evaluations. The minimum database for a senior pet

diseases. The acronym DISHAA has been historically used for the

should include a detailed blood proﬁle including thyroid panel and uri-

categories of clinical signs seen with cognitive dysfunction: Disorien-

nalysis. Additional screening or diagnostic tests may be used depending

tation, alterations in social Interactions, changes in Sleep-wake

on the minimum database and may include thoracic, abdominal, and

cycles, loss of House training and other learned behaviors, altered

other imaging. Diagnostic approaches for senior dogs and cats based

Activity levels, and increased Anxiety. In dogs, the most common

on body system are summarized in Table 2, Diagnostic Approaches

clinical signs include daytime sleeping and nighttime restlessness,

by Body System for Senior Dogs and Cats. This list is not exhaus-

decreased interaction, disorientation at home, and anxiety. In a more

tive and additional diagnostic approaches may be warranted.

recent study, it was found that visual impairment, smell disturbance,

38

tremors, and falling down are associated with the diagnosis of CCD
and may help clients and veterinarians recognize early CCD.41 Other

Unknown Diagnosis or Comorbidities
Senior pets may have several concurrent medical issues and associated clinical signs. These complex cases may be referred to an appropriate specialist. Alternatively, the client may opt for palliative care,
and it may be helpful to have a trained palliative care veterinarian to
consult with on the case.
There may be clients who do not wish to pursue diagnostics for
a number of reasons, including the age of the pet, concern and fear
of certain test procedures or outcomes, and ﬁnancial constraints. If
the client chooses to not pursue diagnostics or treatment, veterinarians should discuss the beneﬁt of symptomatic treatment and how it
can improve the pet’s QOL. This may encourage the client to access
and continue palliative care. If the client chooses to seek additional
diagnostics, then either performing them or seeking referral to a specialist may be indicated for complex comorbidities.

clinical signs of note include lack of recognition of and interaction
with familiar people and objects, loss of house training, losses in
behavioral training, appetite changes, and compulsion or pacing.41
Clinical signs in cats are similar, although cats tend to have an
increase in interaction and vocalization compared with dogs.42 Anxiety has been recognized as a signiﬁcant component of this disorder
that should not be overlooked.43
Cognitive dysfunction may be a diagnosis of exclusion. A thorough history, physical examination, neurological examination,
biochemical evaluation, and urinalysis are integral to ensure these
animals do not have other underlying disease causing similar clinical
signs. Neurological examination may be consistent with forebrain
dysfunction, with evidence of dementia and compulsion. An MRI
of the brain is recommended to rule out structural disease. Other
differentials for similar behavior changes may include intracranial
neoplasia, pain, and organ dysfunction.39 Certain MRI changes are

Managing Cognitive Dysfunction and
Behavioral Anxiety

suggestive of cognitive dysfunction, such as reduction in mass of the

Canine and feline cognitive dysfunction (CCD/FCD) is an age-

ings should be correlated with clinical signs.44

interthalamic adhesion and cerebrocortical atrophy, although ﬁnd-

related neurodegenerative condition well described in dogs but less

To mitigate the underdiagnosis of cognitive dysfunction, speciﬁc

so in cats. Approximately 14–22.5% of dogs older than 8 yr suffer

and directed questions can be used as markers.40,42 Multiple ques-

39

from age-related cognitive impairment.

Clinical signs of cognitive

tionnaires exist that can be used as both diagnostic and monitoring

dysfunction vary between dogs and cats and may not be recognized

tools.45,46 These canine cognitive dysfunction/QOL questionnaires

JAAHA.ORG

7

TABLE 2
Diagnostic Approaches by Body System for Senior Dogs and Cats

Body System
Integument

Diagnostic Approach
PE focus: Identify, describe, and map skin lesions, i.e., pruritus,
alopecia. Do not forget nails, nail beds, and interdigital spaces.
Baseline dermatology diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
• Skin scraping/impression cytology of any lesions
• Dermatophyte testing if concerned about fungal disease
• Measuring, mapping and aspiration of any growths
• Other integument issues regarding nails, nail beds; ears may
• Evaluate for pain
• For malignant conditions, consider thoracic and abdominal

Therapeutic Tip

• Avoid steroid use if

possible until a microscopic
diagnosis is established.

• Recognize that dermatologic
issues may also have a pain
component and should be
treated for pain.

• Use validated scales

to monitor progression of
treatment as appropriate.1

imaging as part of the clinical staging

The Guidelines task force encourages skin biopsy in senior pets
presented with chronic dermatopathy if the baseline diagnostics
are negative.
Recommend referral to a specialist for chronic, progressive, or
neoplastic cases.
Oral

PE focus: Oral cavity, with particular focus on fractured, loose
teeth, foreign bodies, oral ulcers, inflammation, masses. Make
note of degree of dental disease and ability to prehend and
swallow. Head and neck palpation.

• Staging procedures is a
viable plan.

Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis

Additional diagnostic tests:

• Complete visual examination of the entire oral cavity with
general anesthesia
• Head and neck radiographs
• Skull CT may be useful

Hemolymphatic

PE focus: Mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, abdominal
palpation, lymph node palpation.
Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
• Lymph node aspiration if indicated
Additional diagnostic tests:

• CBC with pathology evaluation for cell morphology
• Imaging to rule out secondary etiology for hematologic abnormality
• Coagulation profile
• Flow cytometry in select cases
• Bone marrow aspirate
(continued)

8

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

TABLE 2
Continued

Body System
GI/Hepatic/
Biliary

Diagnostic Approach
PE focus: Abdominal palpation, noting enlargement of organs,
thickening, masses. Color of mucous membranes, skin (inner ear
pinnae), conjunctiva, noting if jaundice present.
Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
• Thoracic radiographs
• Abdominal radiographs

Therapeutic Tip

• Enzymes or probiotics may
be useful based on the
individual patient.

• Appetite stimulants and

meat puree treats can
be used for cats who are
hyporexic or anorexic.

• Recommend medication for
nausea, as well as appetite
stimulants as indicated.

Additional diagnostic considerations:

• Abdominal ultrasound

• Tip: If ultrasound shows thickened muscularis layer, then
laparoscopic or surgical biopsies appear to be more
diagnostic.

• Fecal sample examination
• Rectal examination
• Gastrointestinal panel
• Bile acids
• Endoscopy/colonoscopy
Renal/
Urogenital

PE focus: Evaluate muscle condition score, body condition
score, size and shape of kidneys, propensity for crystal or stone
formation, indications of neoplasia.

• Maintaining hydration is
imperative.
• Provide daily fluid therapy

for patients when indicated,
recognizing this may be
earlier for senior patients,
and may include parenteral,
subcutaneous, or
intravenous fluid therapy.

Baseline renal diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis

• Tip: Monitor and record early trends in SDMA, creatinine, and
USG (making a chart of these indicators may be helpful)
• If proteinuria present, UP:UC ratio

• Blood pressure
• Urine culture if indicated

• Distinguish bacteriuria/pyuria from infection

For patients with renal disease identified with screening tests:

• Abdominal imaging (radiographs and ultrasound may both be
useful; however, ultrasound may be preferred for a solitary test)
• Monitor blood pressure more frequently in patients with chronic
kidney disease
• Continued monitoring of bloodwork, SDMA, BUN, creatinine
• Continued monitoring for proteinuria

• Adopt an antimicrobial
•

approach to urinary tract
infections.2
Recognize renal failure
may create pain and/or
pruritus (this is recognized
in humans).3

For patients identified with uroliths:

• Surgery may be indicated
• Diet change may be indicated

For patients identified with neoplasia:

• Additional staging recommended
• Referral to a veterinary oncologist should be considered
(continued)

JAAHA.ORG

9

TABLE 2
Continued

Body System
Neurologic

Diagnostic Approach
PE focus: Full neurologic examination with checklist.4,5

Therapeutic Tip

• Use multimodal therapy.

Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
• Full neurologic examination

Additional diagnostic tests to consider:

• SOD-1 testing for degenerative myelopathy
• MRI
• DISHAA or other questionnaires for cognitive dysfunction
syndrome
• Ultrasound, chest radiograph
6

Diagnostic tips:

• Rule out syncope vs. seizure
• Palpate axillae for pain from a nerve sheath tumor
• Evaluate client video for all conditions
• Evaluate toenail wear
Consider referral to a neurologist for further workup/MRI:

• Include any client video with referral materials
Endocrine

PE focus: General body appearance, palpation of thyroid,
abdominal palpation, concern for hair loss, distended abdomen,
redistribution of fat, and eye changes, including corneal, anterior
chamber, lens, pressures, tear production, retina.
Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis

Additional diagnostic tests to consider:

• The FreeStyle Libre sensor
can provide continuous
monitoring for diabetic
animals for up to 14 days
(see the 2018 AAHA
Diabetes Management
Guidelines for Dogs and
Cats).7

• Special hormonal assays depending on suspected disease
• Regional imaging and advanced imaging with CT is often
necessary

Additional testing for chronic disease:

• Hyperthyroid/Hypothyroid: Monitor T4, calcium levels
• Hyperadrenocorticism:
• ACTH stimulation test or low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test

• Monitor adrenal size with ultrasound

• Hypoadrenocorticism: ACTH stimulation test
• Diabetes: periodic or continuous glucose monitoring,

fructosamine, urinalysis to monitor for ketones, urinary tract
infection, hematuria

• Hyperparathyroidism: Monitor calcium, phosphorus levels,
urinalysis for urinary tract infection
• Hypoparathyroidism: Monitor calcium levels

(continued)

10

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

TABLE 2
Continued

Body System
Cardiac/
Respiratory

Diagnostic Approach
PE focus: Auscultation of heart and lungs, identify normal and
abnormality.
Baseline cardiac/respiratory diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
• Thoracic radiographs
• Echocardiogram
• Blood pressure
• NT-proBNP

Therapeutic Tip

• Dogs with pacemakers often
do well.
• Consider working with a
rehabilitation specialist for
therapy options.

• Owner education is key to
therapeutic management.

Additional diagnostic considerations:

• Abdominal imaging if necessary
• Respiratory: Infectious disease evaluation (PCR methods preferred)
Musculoskeletal

PE focus: General body palpation with focus on spine, limbs, joints,
muscular condition score, movement examination, full orthopedic
examination, evaluation of pain level.
Baseline diagnostic evaluation should include:

• Senior blood profile with urinalysis
Additional diagnostic tests:

• Regional radiographs
• Arthrocentesis

• Consider a diagnostic round
of pain control.
• Use multimodal pain
management when
possible.

• Make recommendations

for clients interested in
using harnesses, slings, etc.

• Encourage clients to video

their pets when they are
monitoring pain and mobility
as this can provide valuable
insight to guide treatment.

1

Olivry T, Saridomichelakis M, Nuttall T, et al. Validation of the Canine Atopic Dermatitis Extent and Severity Index (CADESI)-4, a simplified severity scale
for assessing skin lesions of atopic dermatitis in dogs. Vet Dermatol. 2014;25(2):77-e25. doi:10.1111/vde.12107

2 See Frey E, Costin M, Granick J, Kornya M, Weese JS. 2022 AAFP/AAHA Antimicrobial Stewardship Guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2022;58(4):1–5.
doi:10.5326/1547-3317-58.4.1. Available at aaha.org/antimicrobials.
3 O'Connor NR, Corcoran AM. End-stage renal disease: symptom management and advance care planning [published correction appears in Am Fam
Physician. 2012 May 15;85(10):950. Dosage error in article text]. Am Fam Physician. 2012;85(7):705–710.
4 Averill DR Jr. The neurologic examination. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 1981;11(3):511–521. doi:10.1016/s0195-5616(81)50056-8
5 Chrisman C. Step-by-step: the neurologic examination. Clinician's Brief. May 2018. Available at https://www.cliniciansbrief.com/article/step-step-

neurologic-examination.
6

progression of signs of cognitive dysfunction syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2021;259(6):637–643. doi:10.2460/javma.259.6.637
7 Behrend E, Holford A, Lathan P, Rucinsky R, Schulman R. 2018 AAHA Diabetes Management Guidelines for Dogs and Cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.

2018;54(1):1–21. doi:10.5326/JAAHA-MS-6822/
ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone
BUN: blood urea nitrogen
CBC: complete blood count
CT: computed tomography scan
NT-proBNP: N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide
PCR: polymerase chain reaction
PE: physical examination
SDMA: symmetric dimethylarginine assay
SOD-1: superoxide dismutase
T4: thyroxine
UP:UC ratio: urine protein to creatinine ratio
USG: urine specific gravity

JAAHA.ORG

11

are to be completed by clients at set intervals. One scale, CADES

outline speciﬁc, comprehensive recommendations for pain assess-

(CAnine DEmentia Scale), is predictive of the progression of cogni-

ment and management.3,12

tive impairment.47 Serial scores provided by clients and documented

Clients often perceive changes in their geriatric pets as normal

in the medical record can also be used as a tool for client education

aging when it may be the result of clinical chronic pain. Clients may

and to guide treatment.

not perceive that changes in behavior or in vital signs can indicate

Evidence suggests that management and treatment of cogni-

pain, especially when chronic pain behavior changes may be subtle.

tive dysfunction are most effective when started early, highlighting

Educating clients about how to recognize and monitor acute and

the importance of early recognition of cognitive impairment by the

chronic pain should be paramount for the veterinary team. Clients

veterinary team. Although many therapies have been studied for

can take videos of their animal moving and interacting with their

the treatment of cognitive dysfunction, selegiline, a selective irre-

environment. Videos are useful for the client and the practitioner to

versible monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, is the only drug labeled

evaluate changes in movement and can be used to monitor responses

for use for canine cognitive dysfunction. Selegiline is dosed at 0.5–1

to medications and therapies. This may help large-breed dogs with

mg/kg once a day OR every 24 hr. in the morning for 30 days, at

degenerative joint disease and cats who, owing to subtle changes in

which point the dose can be adjusted up to the next tablet size if

behavior, may not have their chronic pain recognized.55

there is no improvement at the lower dose. Selegiline is effective in
48

Treatment options for managing pain and mobility must be

Toxicity can occur

integrative and multimodal. Addressing these issues early in the

if selegiline is used in conjunction with other antidepressants, nar-

course of the disease improves outcome. Pain management may

cotics, phenylpropanolamine, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

include the use of pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, herbals, weight

Newer treatments are being investigated and may be available in

management, acupuncture, physical modalities, and environmental

up to 70% of dogs with cognitive dysfunction.

49

the future, such as a butyrylcholinesterase inhibitor.

modiﬁcations. Senior pets with chronic musculoskeletal disease may

Certain diets, especially those high in antioxidants and medium

also beneﬁt from physical rehabilitation. Rehabilitation is an excellent

chain triglycerides, have also been posited for the treatment of this

option for assisting with pain management and increasing mobility

condition. These diets showed the most positive effect when com-

and balance. Rehabilitation may use different therapies to reduce

bined with environmental enrichment (exercise, new toys, cognitive

pain and increase the QOL, including exercise therapy, hydrother-

games, tasks, agility). The quality and rigor of the research associated

apy, acupuncture, manual therapy, and modalities such as photobio-

with other various supplements, nutraceuticals, acupuncture, and

modulation therapy, extracorporeal shock wave therapy, and pulsed
electromagnetic ﬁeld therapy.55

39,50,51

diets is limited.

Anxiety is a clinical sign associated with CCD that may be

Counseling clients on home modiﬁcation and pet accessories to

directly treated. Anxiety has been recognized to signiﬁcantly compro-

increase the mobility and QOL of the pet may include appropriate

mise the QOL of both the pet and family.43 It is a complex syndrome

use of ramps, suitable placement and design of litter boxes, elevation

and can also be related to chronic pain. Chronic pain–related anxiety

of food and water bowls, use of rugs or yoga mats to provide better

is recognized in human cognitive dysfunction.52 The treatment of

footing, ﬁtted and padded harnesses to aid with lifting larger pets,

pain, along with anxiolytics and antidepressants for anxiety, should

toe grips, boots, and socks for foot stability, medical pet shirts for

be considered in the cognitively impaired patient. Various anxiolytics

anxiety, and the use of appropriate beds. As senior pets may have

53

and antidepressants can be considered. Diazepam has been reported

limited vision or hearing, identifying potential hazards in the home

to exacerbate dementia signs in humans.54 There are FDA-approved

and yard such as stairs or pools should be included when discussing

drugs licensed for dogs for noise phobia and separation anxiety (e.g.,

senior care with clients.

clomipramine) but not speciﬁcally for anxiety associated with CCD.
Shorter-acting drugs such as trazodone and alprazolam are preferred
by the task force because of their rapid onset and clearance from the
body, as well as their very limited side-effect proﬁle.

Special Disease Consideration: GOLPP Complex
Environmental changes may be helpful for dogs who have developed
GOLPP complex, which has been increasingly recognized in geriatric
large-breed dogs (Labrador retrievers and associated breeds). This

Pain Management

condition causes degeneration of long nerves in the body, particu-

Identifying, preventing, and minimizing pain are essential in the

larly the laryngeal and sciatic nerves, causing laryngeal paralysis and

senior patient. The 2022 AAHA Pain Management Guidelines for

weakness of the pelvic limbs with conscious proprioception deﬁcits.

Dogs and Cats and the 2021 AAFP Feline Senior Care Guidelines

Clinical signs include exercise intolerance, upper airway stridor,

12

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

weakness, and sarcopenia. Comorbidities may include osteoarthritis

for hyporexic or anorexic patients.70 Resumption of favorite foods,

and secondary musculoskeletal pain. Treatment may include main-

even if not medically balanced, may provide some nutrition with a

taining QOL with laryngeal tie-back surgery and physical therapy to

more positive experience for both the caregiver and patient.

preserve muscle mass. Pain management should be included in the
treatment plan.56 Clients should be counseled that heat stroke may
be a complication in this subgroup of patients.57
Disease Management: Nutritional
Changes to nutrition may be useful in the management of disease
for the senior dog or cat and have been used for conditions such as
hyperthyroidism, chronic kidney disease, osteoarthritis, and diabetes
mellitus. Different ingredients in a balanced diet may be used to treat
or manage a chronic disease; for example, adding antioxidants to the

End of Life and Euthanasia
The 2016 AAHA/IAAHPC End-of-Life Care Guidelines provide
detailed recommendations for maximizing patient comfort and minimizing suffering while providing a collaborative and supportive partnership with the caregiver client.71 For many clients, as their senior
pet develops chronic progressive disease or a terminal illness, the
events and veterinary care surrounding their pet’s ﬁnal life stage are
signiﬁcant.

diet of dogs and cats may help manage conditions such as cognitive

Palliative Care or Hospice?

dysfunction syndrome, immunosenescence, osteoarthritis, and heart

The option of palliative care should be offered to the client when there

disease.58–60 Long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have
been shown to have synovial anti-inﬂammatory effects in osteoarthritis,61–64 and medium-chain triglycerides have been recommended
for cognitive dysfunction syndrome.65 For cats with diabetes mellitus,
treating for issues such as obesity and inactivity is known to be beneﬁcial to managing the disease. A dietary change to a high-protein

is a chronic, progressive, or terminal diagnosis. Palliative care consists
of symptom and pain management that can be provided along with
curative treatment. Palliative care develops a plan and provides guidance for the family in symptom and disease management, pain management, and physical or rehabilitation therapy, which helps minimize
the suffering of patients regardless of life stage.

(.45% on dry-weight basis) and low-carbohydrate (,15%) diet

If a client is facing an end-of-life decision for their pet, hospice,

given in small frequent meals may help minimize postprandial glu-

which is the end stage of palliative care, can be considered.72 Hospice

cose inﬂux.66

provides services in addition to palliative care to later-stage, termi-

For patients with renal disease, studies have shown that a renal

nally ill patients and their families, such as planning for the decline

diet with restrictive protein provides longer survival times with fewer

of the pet with their particular disease, dealing with a crisis that may

uremic crises for patients.67 IRIS currently recommends phosphorus
control with a reduction in intake and addition of binders.68 At IRIS

arise, and how the family would like the animal to die, such as by
euthanasia or a palliated death from their disease. Regardless of the

stage 2, the addition of long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty

disease stage, the clients are empowered to care for their pet, spend

acids is suggested. Healthy pets and early renal cases should not

quality time with their pet, and deal with anticipatory grief.

require protein restriction, and quality and quantity should be care-

For palliative or hospice pets and their families, discussing disease

fully managed in later IRIS stages. Protein restriction is to be consid-

trajectories and the clinical signs of approaching and imminent death

ered at IRIS stage 2 and recommended at IRIS stage 3.

is important. A daily and crisis plan should be developed with the goals

For cats with hyperthyroidism, clinical concerns include weight

of providing ongoing care for the patient and support for the family.

loss and LBM loss, and a high-protein (.40%), limited-carbohydrate

Finally, a discussion of the plan for death, whether it be euthanasia or

(,25%) diet while restricting iodine is recommended.66,69 Fishbased diets should be avoided. Dogs that have developed hypothyroidism may require a diet that has restricted calories.
Palliative care patients may be hyporexic or anorexic. Focus
may need to be shifted from a balanced diet to just getting the ani-

palliated death, is needed. If a palliated death is chosen, the use of palliative sedation should be discussed. If euthanasia is the choice, the
options could be presented at the initial consultation and further discussed in future follow-up appointments. Clients may opt for a home
euthanasia service as these have become more readily available.

mal to eat something. For palliative patients that are anorexic, enteral
or parenteral feeding (e.g., esophagostomy or percutaneous endo-

The Initial Appointment

scopic gastrostomy tubes to reduce food aversion) should be dis-

The initial palliative appointment should occur early in the course of

cussed with the client. Feeding tubes can also be beneﬁcial for giving

the disease. There is research on the human side of palliative care

parenteral medication, the amount of which may be substantial in

that indicates starting early increases the quality and the quantity of

the end-of-life patient. Appetite stimulants, medication for nausea

life.73 Palliative care may be basic, such as symptom management, to

and vomiting, and careful ﬂuid administration should be provided

advanced level care, including multiple comorbidities and more

JAAHA.ORG

13

advanced pain and symptom management. The introductory end-of-

Limitations on Palliative Care

life appointments may be longer than the average appointment, with

The veterinarian should also recognize the limitations of the client in

some palliative practitioners using up to 3 hr for a single appoint-

providing nursing care for their pet. In addition, having a frank dis-

ment. Listening to clients about their goals, fears, and worries and

cussion about the ﬁnancial, physical, emotional, and time implica-

then educating them about end-of-life care takes time. It is key to

tions of different end-of-life care options may help the client come

deﬁning the client’s goals of care and maximizing the QOL of the

to a collaborative decision regarding end of life and their choice

patient. Compassionate, advanced serious disease communication

regarding euthanasia. Advanced age is not the only criterion for

may reduce the likelihood of premature or difﬁcult euthanasia

making medical decisions and does not preclude surgeries or other

events.

signiﬁcant medical interventions depending on the goals of the client

The palliative appointment may begin with an in-depth conver-

and the condition of the patient. Clinical scenarios that may affect

sation around the client’s understanding of the history, diagnosis,

QOL and inﬂuence decision making for the client may include

and current medications of their pet and then develop a plan based

anorexia, symptom progression, severe or unrelenting chronic pain,

on the client’s goals of care. After a thorough discussion regarding

deterioration of a condition during active treatment, persistent cough

history, a complete physical examination with pain assessment would

even at rest, cognitive dysfunction progression, and mobility issues.

be the next step. After that, the diagnosis, prognosis, and clinical outcomes of chronic disease or end-stage organ dysfunction can be discussed. A plan can then be developed based on the client’s goals of
care and may proceed to a discussion of palliative care, hospice, or
humane euthanasia options. Veterinarians may explore a client’s
fears, beliefs, and physical abilities necessary to be an effective caregiver. The clinician and client may use different tools to determine
goals of care, and what the pet will or can tolerate may inﬂuence
end-of-life decisions.

The Veterinary Team in End-of-Life Care
The veterinary team can guide clients to decisions by advocating for
both the senior pet and client. The veterinary team includes the veterinarian, credentialed technicians, veterinary assistants, and client service
representatives. Additional team members that may help with end-oflife care can include mental health professionals and grief counselors,
pharmacies, compounding pharmacies, groomers, pet sitters, respite
workers, spiritual leaders, and end-of-life care specialists. Although the
client is generally the best advocate for the pet, veterinary teams may
help guide them toward the best decision for both the pet and family.

Tools for End-of-Life Care

Making a decision for a beloved pet is complex, and empathy and

Equipping clients with tools to use to evaluate their pet, such as vali-

understanding on the part of the veterinary team to support the client’s

dated pain scales, validated QOL scales, advanced directives, and

psychological, spiritual, and emotional beliefs is optimal.

clinical signs of imminent death, may help the client with their goals

Veterinarians and other clinical staff may experience physical or

of care. QOL is a subjective perception and may be unique to the cli-

compassion fatigue when dealing with patients with multiple medical

ent and inﬂuenced by the bond they share with the pet. However,

concerns or undiagnosed diseases. Maintaining a positive outlook,

using a validated QOL scale may help the client have a more objec-

such as a combination of celebrating senior pets and sharing suc-

tive view of their pet’s condition. As of this writing, there are very

cesses with clients and team members, may help boost morale for

few validated QOL scales for the animal patient. Most QOL scales

everyone involved in the care of the pet.

found online are not currently validated.74 Clients may also track

Clients can also experience fatigue, which can be minimized or

good versus bad days on a calendar or journal to get a more objective

prevented with activities such as creating a joy-of-living list, creating

and accurate view of changes. There are now apps that may also be

a bucket list, setting up pet dates, and maintaining the sacred

useful in tracking changes like respiratory rate.

human-animal bond that emphasizes QOL for the pet and their
families.

Checking In
Clients may need additional time to process the initial conversation,

Making Senior Patients a Practice Priority

and further discussion may need to occur at a different time. If a cli-

Senior pets make up 44% of the pet population. This demographic

ent seems overwhelmed with information, schedule another time to

should encourage veterinary practices to expand their focus on the

continue the discussion. Veterinarians that have an open approach

senior pet and their family. There are several ways practices can

to the conversation, acknowledge the client’s goals or ideas, and bal-

encourage families to bring their senior pets into the clinic and a vast

ance the discussion with QOL may develop a deeper connection

number of tools that can be implemented in the clinic to make sure it

with the client, improving client compliance.

is a safe and enjoyable visit for all involved. Creating a senior-friendly

14

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

hospital may include changing or adding senior-friendly ﬂooring,

seen at home. In addition, images of the pet’s food and water area

using pheromones, developing questionnaires and checklists speciﬁ-

and sleeping environment may also be helpful.

cally for senior pets, scheduling longer appointment times, developing
Senior Care Kits, and expanding end-of-life care tools and practices.

When booking the appointment, enough time must be allocated
for the veterinarian to properly give a thorough examination and
assessment of the pet. Extra time will be needed to discuss disease

Creating a Senior-Friendly Hospital
Creating a Senior Pet Champions team that develops senior care
standard operating procedures and is proactive in identifying areas
for improving the senior care experience can create a practice culture
that emphasizes optimum care for older pets. This approach will
not only inspire more families to bring their senior pets to your
practice but also ensure these patients are treated with the best
care possible.

conditions, environmental adjustment suggestions, medical therapies,
and family goals for the patient. It is helpful to also include a discussion about the progression of the ailments and diseases the family is
managing. This will help establish expectations early in the senior
care process and assist with decision making later.
At the conclusion of the appointment, the client should be
given handouts with detailed information that may include
diagnosed disease(s), details on medications dispensed (or recom-

Evaluating the Physical Space for Senior Patients

mended), and speciﬁc product recommendations and recommenda-

When developing a plan for a senior-friendly hospital, consider the

tions for follow-up care. The veterinary team should actively educate

physical components of the clinic that may be a challenge to the

the client to avoid dismissing certain age-related changes as merely

aging pet. Is the pet able to walk up to and into the building easily?

“old age,” a catch-all phrase that inadequately addresses the speciﬁc

Do the ﬂoors support senior pets? Are the senior cats kept in a calm

and often treatable conditions affecting the senior dog or cat.

area away from dogs, and are they able to be comfortable during

Avoid just discussing the need for biannual diagnostics to

their visit? What is the noise level in the lobby, examination rooms,

uncover hidden diseases with clients. Instead, focus on all the expert

and treatment area?

care, ideas, and support the hospital will provide to ensure their

The exterior of the veterinary practice should be examined,

senior pet’s quality and quantity of life. After each healthcare visit,

including the parking lot, for obstacles the senior pet may need to

provide the client with patient-speciﬁc written information and

overcome. For example, are there a few steps (or a curb) to climb to

instructions because appointments can sometimes involve informa-

get to the entrance? Even one step up may be a struggle for an older

tion overload.

dog, and installing appropriate ramps can increase ease of access to
the front door of the practice. Flooring in the lobby, examination

Senior Care Kits

rooms, and treatment area should also be assessed, and, if necessary,

Many clinics have puppy or kitten kits available for new pet families

bathmats or yoga mats can be used to accommodate the senior pet.

but do not offer a Senior Care Kit for families of the senior patient.

Consider covering scales and tables with similar mats so that the

A client with a senior pet may have as many issues and questions as

older dog or cat will have better grip and feel more comfortable.

someone with a new puppy or kitten. To create a Senior Care Kit for

Senior pets may have noise and light sensitivities, and adjusting light-

both dogs and cats, consider the following contents:

ing and installing noise dampening tiles for walls could help. Phero-

 Customized healthcare and product recommendations
 Information on common senior pet diseases, such as chronic kidney
disease, congestive heart failure, neoplasia, cognitive dysfunction,
mobility changes, and chronic pain
 Medication information for their pet’s prescriptions, including dispensing instructions, pill-giving tips, and side effects to watch for
 Information on chronic versus acute pain recognition and detection
(include visual aid of the practice’s preferred validated chronic and
acute pain scales)
 Speciﬁc nutritional recommendations for their pet, including visual
information about body condition score and muscle condition score
 Cognitive dysfunction questionnaire
 Tumor/skin maps
 Changes that clients could make in their home, which may include
elevating food bowls, keeping pets safe with barriers and gates, alerts
or alarms in areas where they can get into trouble (e.g., pools and
stairs), yoga mats and carpet runners, ramps, and bedding in accessible areas

mone sprays in the examination rooms and the lobby may also help
to relax anxious animals.
Senior pets who require treatment or hospitalization require
good traction in the kennels and cages, additional padding in the
recovery areas, decreased stress handling, sufﬁcient warmth, and
minimal noise in treatment and surgical recovery areas.
Planning for the Senior Pet’s Appointment
Providing a senior pet owner a questionnaire to ﬁll out before a visit
can help clients focus on behavior and note changes they may be seeing with their senior pet. When a family schedules an appointment,
provide a species-speciﬁc senior pet questionnaire. Instructions on
taking video of pets can be included, and clients can be asked to take
pictures and videos displaying mobility and any abnormal behavior

JAAHA.ORG

15

 Changes that can help with mobility: toe grips and boots, harnesses
for mobility, relocating a dog’s play or resting area closer to the
door, and lower litter boxes for cats
 Changes to decrease stress in the home: use of pheromone sprays,
temperature control, access to sunlight, nightlights, sound machines,
and front door signs to ask guests not to ring the doorbell
 Bucket and joys-of-living lists
 Checklist of local senior-friendly/recommended pet sitters, gentle
groomers, daycare and boarding facilities, and local and online support groups
 Validated QOL assessments and scale
 Information about caregiver burden and caregiver support resources
 Anticipatory grief, pet loss, and grief information, including a crisis
phone number and website
 Veterinary palliative care and hospice information

A Senior Care Kit will help clients support their senior pet and
improve QOL. Other useful tools could include encouraging clients
to take pictures and videos of their pets within a speciﬁed time (i.e.,
daily, weekly, or monthly) to help the client and the veterinarian
track body condition changes, mobility, joyful activities, and other
behaviors associated with the senior life stage. Having clients see
these changes over time will help them better assess QOL as the pet’s
disease progresses.
It is helpful to provide families of older pets with a checklist of
what to look for (and what to avoid) regarding appropriate pet sitters,

ﬂooring, and assistance with getting the pet in and out of the car are
all valued services the practice can add to the senior care experience.
Videos of the changes the hospital has made to become senior
friendly may also be a good addition to the website. An end-of-life
care section can be developed that may include a QOL assessment,
pain management with validated tools, information about caregiver
burden, and pet loss and grief resources. Clinic websites often focus
on puppy and kitten pictures—a practice can stand out as senior
friendly by ensuring that senior pets make up at least 30% of the
visual content of the hospital’s website.
Managing the Caregiver Burden
Caring for a senior pet takes time, patience, money, and emotional
and often physical stamina. It can take an emotional and physical
toll on the caregivers and lead to caregiver burden. Practices can support clients by developing an education program on caregiver burden. The hospital may alleviate some of the load by helping the client
in several ways—for example, providing a Senior Care Kit with lists
of people who may be able to provide pet sitting or respite care,
offering options for medications that are easier to administer (e.g.,
using compounding pharmacies to create palatable medications),
providing a veterinary technician or assistant to help with the daily

pet loss support groups, gentle groomers, senior hotels, and boarding

care of the pet, and, in some cases, limiting medical treatment to

facilities (e.g., in-home boarding staff who can administer medications

what is essential.

to the pet). If the primary caregiver is going to be out of town or

Conﬂicts in the home regarding the pet’s behavioral changes,

unavailable, the client should have a letter given to the pet sitter that

ﬁnancial constraints, emotional guilt, stress, or disputes with partners

includes a phone number for the client; the time zone they will be in;

or family regarding care of the pet may add to the caregiver burden.

who the pet sitter is and an authorization for them to make decisions;

Providing information on coping mechanisms to caregivers, includ-

how the client is going to pay for any services rendered in case of

ing resources for accessing mental health professionals, social work-

emergency; and a designated family member, friend, or other repre-

ers, counselors, and psychologists, in Senior Care Kits can be helpful.

sentative who is authorized to make healthcare decisions for the pet.

Honesty and openness about the care that may be required for the

Keep in mind that not all clients are able to come into the

senior patient currently and in the future is paramount. Developing

clinic. It may be a good idea to have the essential senior care resour-

a plan together with the client that recognizes and works within their

ces, tools, and information readily available on your website.

limitations is the best course of action for limiting caregiver burden.
For example, if the dog is panting and pacing all night, suggesting a

Promoting Senior Care in the Veterinary Practice

dental cleaning may not be the best thing to focus on—even if it is

Practices with a focus on senior care can promote their expertise

the most medically relevant issue to treat. Alleviating sleep disturban-

through their practice website and social media. Topics can include

ces ﬁrst may relieve caregiver stress and then allow the client to focus

mobility issues, cognition changes, chronic pain, elimination behav-

on other medical concerns.

ior and incontinence, and changes in hearing and vision. Information on common diseases that clients may see in their senior pet,

Communicating with Families of Senior Pets

along with the common clinical signs, could be provided on the web-

Families with senior pets may come into the examination visit with

site or social media. Home tips, product recommendations, videos,

differing goals and beliefs. Getting people on the same path may take

and pictures of what the chronic or terminal disease might look like

some work. Interactions with each individual in the family may

and when to visit the veterinarian may also be added.

mean longer appointment times to hear out different perspectives

The hospital website should promote what the practice does dif-

and work on empathizing with and validating their feelings. Senior

ferently for senior pets. For example, longer appointments, special

pets may have a long list of issues that can complicate the visit.

16

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

Developing tools to start a conversation among the family members

Work with the client to prioritize medications by importance

that centers the needs of the pet and takes their concerns into

and anticipate dosing challenges or missed doses. Involve the client

account is a good place to start.

in problem solving and developing a mutually acceptable plan. This

News of a declining condition or serious illness is common in

is another opportunity to identify what medications or nutraceuticals

geriatric medicine, so careful use of communication is essential. How

are being given and to call attention to possible adverse effects if

the patient’s condition is explained and the goals of care are estab-

administered concurrently with prescribed medications. When dis-

lished with the client may have a great impact on the animal’s care

pensing medications, make sure the names of the medications are

and the client’s experience. Listening to the client’s understanding of

discussed along with the beneﬁts, expected outcomes, and potential

the condition and eliciting how much detail they prefer can be estab-

side effects. Repeat and summarize the medical recommendations,

lished before continuing the conversation. Be aware of unintended

and then check to conﬁrm that the caregiver agrees with the plan

bias in these discussions.

and questions have been addressed. Finally, schedule a follow-up

Clients may have many questions. For example, they may want
to know if there was a cause of the illness, how serious it is, and

time to check in and re-evaluate how the medications are working
and how the client and pet are adjusting to the new plan.

what are the expected outcomes in the short and long term. Studies
have shown that truth is important, delivered clearly with compas75

Using Telehealth and Telemedicine Technologies

Use a comfortable area in the

Veterinary practices are increasingly using online technologies to

practice free from distractions to maintain focus on the interaction.

gather and disseminate patient information. These developments

sion and without judgment.

Information should be given in bits with pauses to assess the client’s

have encouraged innovations that can enhance care, increase efﬁ-

understanding before moving on to the next topic. Visuals or links

ciency, and expand access. Familiarization with the deﬁnitions and

to written materials may be offered to the client for them to refer to

types of technological medicine and adherence to state, province,

later, especially in situations in which emotions may hinder informa-

and national practice, licensure, and pharmacy law is essential. Many

tion processing. Providing them with a plan for follow-up questions

states require an in-person veterinarian-client-patient relationship to

and resources may be necessary.75

be established ﬁrst. The practice should ascertain security issues, pro-

When there is a large amount of information to convey to a cli-

tect client privacy, and allow for secure transactions. Notes and

ent, grouping it into categories aids recall. For example, “The four

record keeping must be maintained as required by law. Check with

main goals of our therapy are to (1) reduce pain, (2) increase mobil-

your liability carrier to ensure coverage on planned activities.

ity, (3) get to a healthy weight, and (4) help you two enjoy those

The 2021 AAHA-AVMA Telehealth Guidelines for Small Animal

walks on the nature path again.” Tailoring information to the unique

Practice provide a detailed resource for implementing telehealth serv-

situation of the client and pet is important.76

ices in a veterinary practice.77 The components of an effective

Home Tips for Clients Caring for Senior Pets
• Provide regular gentle grooming and nail care
• Consider having a mobile groomer for home grooming to minimize stress
• Keep pets clean and dry at all times, including fur, skin, and bedding
• Provide good bedding that is adequately padded
• Cover slippery floors with secure rugs and mats for traction
• Pets with decreased mobility need additional nursing care, including being walked or turned every few hours
• Monitor skin for redness, rashes, swelling
• Keep flies, fleas, and ticks off the senior pet
• For pets with incontinence issues:
䊊

Minimize use of diapers to avoid secondary infections

䊊

Use disposable or washable waterproof covers for bedding (fleece or mesh)

䊊

Keep patient groomed and/or fur trimmed, particularly on the back legs, tail, and around the vulva, penis, and anus

䊊

Use baby wipes or medicated wipes to keep patient clean in between bathing

JAAHA.ORG

17

diagnostic information. Clinicians should always be mindful of the
limits of telemedicine and provide informed consent for pet owners.
Challenges may arise with the quality of images, the accuracy of the
description of the concern, missed symptoms or physical cues, and
diagnosis without diagnostic testing. Breaches of privacy, ransomware, or malfunctions are additional concerns.79 Clarity on the scope
of care should be addressed with the caregiver during the visit, along
with advice to follow up in person as needed.
Teleconsultation with specialists can aid patient care when specialty practices are hard to access. Check with your practice act
regarding advice obtained from a veterinarian from out of state.
Reports and information also may be transmitted by photo, audio,
or recorded video methods. Clients may become more engaged in
care with this real-time information and be more attuned to signiﬁcant changes.
Pet wearable technology is rapidly expanding and may allow
real-time monitoring of the senior pet. Smartphone apps that moniFIGURE 1

tor pet health and activity are being developed and may further

Components of Telehealth in Small-Animal Practice

transform practice. Frequent inputs of blood glucose, weight, or cardiac abnormalities may enhance understanding of the patient’s
condition and allow for improved treatment outcomes. Pain man-

telehealth component in companion animal practice are shown in

agement may be improved with future artiﬁcial intelligence apps that

Figure 1, Components of Telehealth in Small-Animal Practice.

can assess pain expressions and other aspects of movement. How-

Telehealth can be especially helpful for the senior patient by
increasing access to care in situations where caregivers may have dis-

ever, it is important to note that telehealth and telemedicine innovations are intended to augment, but not replace, in-person care.

abilities, challenges with transportation or time off from work, or
home care obligations or need consultations with specialists. The

Educating the Veterinary Team

senior pet that is difﬁcult to transport, anxious, painful, or fragile

Education of the veterinary team is vital if the practice wishes to pro-

may be examined in less time and for less risk using telehealth

vide the best possible senior care. Aging pets often require special

resources. For the practice, telemedicine care can save time and

nursing care because of changes in both physical and mental abilities.

expense, decrease appointment congestion, and improve workﬂow

If the healthcare team can recognize and address health issues that

and ultimately work-life balance. Some practices allow clinicians to

can inﬂuence the course of treatment, disease management, patient

use a work-from-home option, which may expand hours and use a

care, and outcomes will improve.
Formal training for the veterinary team should involve educa-

fee-for-service arrangement.
Having high-quality rechecks more frequently can improve

tion on the process of aging, senior pet–friendly techniques, and

patient outcomes by assessing response to therapy, progression of

modiﬁcation of the clinic environment to suit the needs of the pet. If

signs, healing of lesions, and any barriers to adherence. Access to

the staff understands that senior pets may be frail, both physically

current electronic patient data can facilitate better discussion, com-

and mentally, simple actions such as prolonging appointment times

78

munication, and cooperation between those involved in the care.

for senior pets or offering gentle holding techniques can be beneﬁcial

Video appointments may be used to gather background infor-

for the pet and the client. If the team understands the aging process,

mation before a clinical procedure or for a follow-up visit, especially

then they are better able to counsel the client on how to manage

with palliative or hospice care. The patient can be featured on cam-

their pets. Every team member should be familiar with the common

era to allow assessment of progress in pain control, movement, or

symptoms of aging and invest time in learning how these changes

wound healing. Often home environments allow a truer picture of

will affect their patients. Low-stress handling and providing more

the animal’s behavior.

comfort measures for the senior pet are important in relieving anxi-

Telemedicine examinations require planning to ensure compliance with state practice acts and optimal capture of accurate

18

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

ety and making senior visits safe and rewarding for the caregiver and
patient alike.80,81

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

The veterinary team should be aware of other methods for opti-

Practices that successfully emphasize senior pet wellness should

mum senior pet care, including:

focus on two aspects of the practice’s culture—team training to pro-

 Examination rooms can be repurposed into senior care rooms with
the addition of yoga mats to prevent slippage; cushions and low
beds for physical comfort; and natural light, soft music, and appropriate pheromone scents for the patients to relieve anxiety, soothe
the patient and the caregiver, and help to relieve pain.
 The use of a senior pet questionnaire can help to prioritize the goals
of the caregiver as well as the veterinary focus for the examination.
 The senior care room should contain materials about caring for
senior pets that can be quickly and easily shared with the caregiver.
 Treating larger patients on the ﬂoor and performing most tasks and
sample collections in the room in the presence of the caregiver can
ease anxiety and increase comfort.
 If the patient requires hospitalization, ensure comfort and safety for
the duration of the hospital stay. Mesh beds can be used to keep
incontinent pets dry, and warm blankets and items from home can
comfort hospitalized seniors.
 Updating the caregiver regularly on the status of the patient helps
build trust and reduce anxiety for the client.80

mote senior pet care and client education to explain the practice’s

The caregiver-pet bond is unique to all animals, and veterinary
teams should recognize that this bond means different things to different people. Practitioners should work with clients to make sure the
animal is not suffering, as sometimes families have difﬁculty letting go
of a pet at the end of life. Teams should be educated on how to recognize and anticipate bereavement and grief. Support should be provided
for team members who work in emotionally charged situations and
may feel overtaxed or take on the pain clients are feeling. Veterinary
team members should be encouraged to seek help when needed.80

Summary
All companion animal practices should ascribe special status to the
senior patient because these clients usually have a very strong, longterm relationship with their pets. Many families of senior pets place
an intrinsic value on their animals as personal companions and family members. Senior pet care presents an opportunity for a practice
to implement optimum and individualized healthcare for its geriatric
patient population.
The onset of the senior life stage differs somewhat for dogs and
cats and within breeds for both species. A thorough diagnostic
assessment as described in the Guidelines will help the practitioner
determine the speciﬁc needs of the senior pet. The senior pet’s
healthcare plan can then be differentiated into evidence-guided protocols for the healthy and unhealthy patient. Using this approach,
senior pet care becomes a carefully staged healthcare plan designed
to preserve and extend the patient’s QOL and maintain a strong,
active relationship between the pet and family. Practices that adopt a
proactive senior pet health care philosophy can educate clients that
the aging process is not an inevitable physical, mental, and behavioral decline that warrants minimal medical intervention.

healthcare recommendations for the senior pet. When both the practice team and the practice’s clients understand the goals for senior
pet care, successfully implementing an effective healthcare program
for older pets is all but ensured.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Mark
Dana of Kanara Consulting Group, LLC, in the preparation of
the guidelines manuscript and Yee Lok To, HBSc, DVM, for
assistance during the task force meetings.
REFERENCES
1. Creevy KE, Grady J, Little SE, et al. 2019 AAHA canine life stage guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2019;55(6):267–90.
2. Quimby J, Gowland S, Carney HC, et al. 2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life
stage guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2021;23(3):211–33.
3. Ray M, Carney HC, Boynton B, et al. 2021 AAFP feline senior care
guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2021;23(7):613–38.
4. Hua J, Hoummady S, Muller C, et al. Assessment of frailty in aged dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2016;77(12):1357–65.
5. Banzato T, Franzo G, Di Maggio R, et al. A frailty index based on clinical data to quantify mortality risk in dogs. Sci Rep 2019;9(1):16749.
6. Lian J, Yue Y, Yu W, et al. Immunosenescence: a key player in cancer
development. J Hematol Oncol 2020;13(1):151.
7. Kirkwood KL. Inﬂammaging. Immunol Invest 2018;47(8):770–3.
8. Dysart LM, Coe JB, Adams CL. Analysis of solicitation of client concerns in companion animal practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;238(12):
1609–15.
9. Shariﬁ-Rad J, Rayess YE, Rizk AA, et al. Turmeric and its major compound curcumin on health: bioactive effects and safety proﬁles for food,
pharmaceutical, biotechnological and medicinal applications. Front Pharmacol 2020;11:01021.
10. Burge K, Gunasekaran A, Eckert J, Chaaban H. Curcumin and intestinal
inﬂammatory diseases: molecular mechanisms of protection. Int J Mol
Sci 2019;20(8):1912.
11. Enomoto M, Lascelles BDX, Gruen ME. Development of a checklist for
the detection of degenerative joint disease-associated pain in cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2020;22(12):1137–47.
12. Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 AAHA pain management guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022;58(2):
55–76.
13. Yin S. Low stress handling restraint and behavior modiﬁcation of dogs &
cats: techniques for developing patients who love their visits. 1st ed. Davis
(CA): CattleDog Publishing; 2009.
14. Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee-Tomasso D, et al. AAFP and ISFM
feline-friendly nursing care guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2012;14(5):
337–49.
15. Slingerland LI, Hazewinkel HA, Meij BP, Picavet P, Voorhout G. Crosssectional study of the prevalence and clinical features of osteoarthritis in
100 cats. Vet J 2011;187(3):304–9.
16. Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 AAHA anesthesia and monitoring
guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020;56(2):59–82.
17. Bellows J, Berg ML, Dennis S, et al. 2019 AAHA dental care guidelines
for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2019;55:49–69.

JAAHA.ORG

19

18. Harvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L. Association of age and body weight
with periodontal disease in North American dogs [published correction
appears in J Vet Dent 1994;11(4):133]. J Vet Dent 1994;11(3):94–105.
19. Kouki MI, Papadimitriou SA, Kazakos GM, et al. Periodontal disease as
a potential factor for systemic inﬂammatory response in the dog. J Vet
Dent 2013;30(1):26–9.
20. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-mouth radiography in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998;59(6):686–91.
21. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-mouth radiography in cats. Am J Vet Res 1998;59(6):692–5.
22. Reiter AM, Lewis JR, Okuda A. Update on the etiology of tooth resorption in domestic cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2005;35(4):
913–42.
23. Soukup J, Lewis J. Oral and maxillofacial tumors, cysts, and tumor-like
lesions. In: Lobprise HB, Dodd Jr, eds. Wiggs’ veterinary dentistry principles and practice. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley; 2019:131–53.
24. Cline MG, Burns KM, Coe JB, et al. 2021 AAHA nutrition and weight
management guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2021;
57(4):153–78.
25. Laﬂamme DP, Ballam JM. Effect of age on maintenance energy requirements of adult cats. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2002;24:82.
26. Cupp C, Perez-Camargo G, Patil A, et al. Long-term food consumption
and body weight changes in a controlled population of geriatric cats.
Compend Contin Educ Small Anim Pract 2004;26:60.
27. Bermingham EN, Thomas DG, Morris PJ, et al. Energy requirement of
adult cats. Br J Nutr 2010;103(8):1083–93.
28. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, et al. Effects of diet restriction on life
span and age-related changes in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;220:
1315–20.
29. Teng KT, McGreevy PD, Toribio JL, et al. Strong associations of ninepoint body condition scoring with survival and lifespan in cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2018;20:1110–8.
30. Perez-Camargo G. Cat nutrition: What is new in the old? Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2004;(suppl 26):5–10.
31. Swanson KS, Kuzmuk KN, Schook LB, et al. Diet affects nutrient digestibility, hematology, and serum chemistry of senior and weanling dogs. J
Anim Sci 2004;82:1713–24.
32. Bufﬁngton CA. Lack of effect of age on digestibility of protein, fat and
dry matter in beagle dogs. In: Burger I, Rivers J, eds. Nutrition of the dog
and cat. 1st ed. New York: Cambridge University Press; 1989:397.
33. Kim KH, Seo K, Cho HW, et al. Age-related digestibility of nutrients
depending on the moisture content in aged dogs. J Anim Sci Technol
2021;63(6):1355–61.
34. Laﬂamme DP. Nutritional care for aging cats and dogs. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2012;42:769–91.
35. Kealy RD. Factors inﬂuencing lean body mass in aging dogs. Comp Cont
Educ Pract Vet 1998;21:34–7.
36. Cupp CJ, Kerr WW. Effect of diet and body composition on life span in
aging cats. Proc Nestle Purina Companion Animal Nutrition Summit:
Focus on Gerontology. Clearwater Beach (FL), March 26-7, 2010:36–42.
37. Schauf S, Stockman J, Haydock R, et al. Healthy ageing is associated
with preserved or enhanced nutrient and mineral apparent digestibility
in dogs and cats fed commercially relevant extruded diets. Animals
(Basel) 2021;11(7):2127.
38. Gough A, Murphy KF. Differential Diagnosis in Small Animal Medicine.
2nd ed. Oxford (UK): Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.
39. Dewey CW, Davies ES, Xie H, et al. Canine cognitive dysfunction: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2019;49(3):477–99.

20

JAAHA

| 59:1 Jan/Feb 2023

40. Salvin HE, McGreevy PD, Sachdev PS, et al. Under diagnosis of canine
cognitive dysfunction: a cross-sectional survey of older companion dogs.
Vet J 2010;184(3):277–81.
41. Ozawa M, Inoue M, Uchida K, Chambers JK, Takeuch Y, Nakayama H.
Physical signs of canine cognitive dysfunction. J Vet Med Sci 2019;81(
12):1829–34.
42. Sordo L, Gunn-Moore DA. Cognitive dysfunction in cats: update on
neuropathological and behavioural changes plus clinical management.
Vet Rec 2020;188(1):1–12.
43. Fast R, Sch€
utt T, Toft N, et al. An observational study with long-term
follow-up of canine cognitive dysfunction: clinical characteristics, survival, and risk factors. J Vet Intern Med 2013;27(4):822–9.
44. Hasegawa D, Yayoshi N, Fujita Y, et al. Measurement of interthalamic
adhesion thickness as a criteria for brain atrophy in dogs with and without cognitive dysfunction (dementia). Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46(6):
452–7.
45. Schutt T, Toft N, Berendt M. A comparison of 2 screening questionnaires for clinical assessment of canine cognitive dysfunction. J Vet
Behav 2015;10:452–8.
46. Salvin HE, McGreevy PD, Sachdev PS, et al. The canine cognitive dysfunction rating scale (CCDR): a data-driven and ecologically relevant
assessment tool. Vet J 2011;188(3):331–6.
47. Madari A, Farbakova J, Katina S, et al. Assessment of severity and
progression of canine cognitive dysfunction syndrome using the
CAnine DEmentia Scale (CADES). Appl Anim Behavior Sci 2015;171:
138–45.
48. Campbell S, Trettien A, Kozan B. A noncomparative open-label study
evaluating the effect of selegiline hydrochloride in a clinical setting. Vet
Ther 2001;2(1):24–39.
49. Pipan MZ, Mihevc SP, Strbenc M, et al. Treatment of canine cognitive dysfunction with novel butyrylcholinesterase inhibitor. Sci Rep 2021;11:18098.
50. Landsberg G. Therapeutic agents for the treatment of cognitive dysfunction syndrome in senior dogs. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005;29(3):471–9.
51. Araujo JA, Studzinski CM, Head E, et al. Assessment of nutritional
interventions for modiﬁcation of age-associated cognitive decline using a
canine model of human aging. Age (Dordr) 2005;27(1):27–37.
52. Khalid S, Sambamoorthi U, Umer A, Lilly CL, Gross DK, Innes KE.
Increased odds of incident Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias in
presence of common non-cancer chronic pain conditions in Appalachian
older adults. J Aging Health 2022;34(2):158–72.
53. Landsberg GM, Deporter T, Araujo JA. Clinical signs and management
of anxiety, sleeplessness, and cognitive dysfunction in the senior pet. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011;41(3):565–90.
54. Cacabelos R. Pharmacogenomics of cognitive dysfunction and neuropsychiatric disorders in dementia. Int J Mol Sci 2020;21(9):3059.
55. Fox SM, Millis D. Multimodal management of canine osteoarthritis. 1st
ed. London: Manson Publishing; 2010.
56. Letko A, Minor KM, Friedenberg SG, et al. A CNTNAP1 missense variant is associated with canine laryngeal paralysis and polyneuropathy.
Genes 2020;11(12):1426.
57. MacPhail, CM. Laryngeal disease in dogs and cats: an update. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2020;50(2):295–310.
58. Pop V, Head E, Hill MA, et al. Synergistic effects of long-term antioxidant diet and behavioral enrichment on beta-amyloid load and nonamyloidgenic processing in aged canines. J Neurosci 2010;30:9831–9.
59. Hall JA, Tooley KA, Gradin JL, et al. Effects of dietary n-6 and n-3 fatty
acids and vitamin E on the immune response of healthy geriatric dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2003;64:762–72.

2023 AAHA Senior Care Guidelines

60. Hayek MG, Massimino SP, Burr JR, et al. Dietary vitamin E improves
immune function in cats. In: Reinhart GA, Carey DP, eds. Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition. Vol. 3. Iams Company; 2000:555–563.
61. Hansen RA, Harris MA, Pluharc GE, et al. Fish oil decreases matrix metalloproteinases in knee synovia of dogs with inﬂammatory joint disease.
J Nutr Biochem 2008;19:101–10.
62. Bauer JE. Therapeutic use of ﬁsh oils in companion animals. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2011;239:1441–51.
63. Lascelles BDX, DePuy V, Thomson A, et al. Evaluation of a therapeutic diet for feline degenerative joint disease. J Vet Intern Med 2010;24:
487–95.
64. Vandeweerd JM, Coisnon C, Clegg P, et al. Systematic review of efﬁcacy
of nutraceuticals to alleviate clinical signs of osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern
Med 2012;26(3):448–56.
65. Pan Y, Landsberg G, Mougeot I, et al. Efﬁcacy of a therapeutic diet
on dogs with signs of cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS): a prospective double blinded placebo controlled clinical study. Front Nutr 2018;5:
127.
66. Laﬂamme D, Gunn-Moore D. Nutrition of aging cats. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2014;44(4):761–74.
67. Ross SJ, Osborne CA, Kirk CA, et al. Clinical evaluation of dietary modiﬁcation for treatment of spontaneous chronic kidney disease in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;229(6):949–57.
68. International Renal Interest Society. IRIS Guidelines. Available at: http://
iris-kidney.com/guidelines/index.html. Accessed September 19, 2022.
69. Loftus JP, DeRosa S, Struble AM, et al. One-year study evaluating efﬁcacy of an iodine-restricted diet for the treatment of moderate-to-severe
hyperthyroidism in cats. Vet Med (Auckl) 2019;10:9–16.
70. Smith AJ. Perspectives on feeding and nutrition. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2019;49(3):501–17.
71. Bishop G, Cooney K, Cox S, et al. 2016 AAHA/IAAHPC end-of-life care
guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016;52(6):341–56.

72. Amir Shanan A, Pierce J, Shearer T. Hospice and palliative care for companion animals; principles and practice. 1st ed. Ames (IA): Wiley Blackwell; 2017.
73. Gaertner J, Siemens W, Meerpohl JJ, et al. Effect of specialist palliative
care services on quality of life in adults with advanced incurable illness
in hospital, hospice, or community settings: systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 2017;357:j2925.
74. Belshaw Z, Asher L, Harvey ND, Dean RS. Quality of life assessment in
domestic dogs: an evidence-based rapid review. Vet J 2015;206(2):203–12.
75. Stoewen DL, Coe JB, MacMartin C. Qualitative study of the communication expectations of clients accessing oncology care at a tertiary referral
center for dogs with life-limiting cancer. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014;245:
785–95.
76. Adams C, Kurtz S. Skills for communicating in veterinary medicine. 1st
ed. New York: Dewpoint Publishing; 2016.
77. Cox S, Dodd C, Evans B, et al. 2021 AAHA/AVMA telehealth guidelines
for small-animal practice. Available at: https://www.aaha.org/globalassets/
02-guidelines/telehealth/2021-aaha-avma-telehealth-guidelines.pdf. Accessed
September 19, 2022.
78. Klein TM, Augustin M, Kirsten N, et al. Attitudes towards using electronic health records of patients with psoriasis and dermatologists: a
cross-sectional study. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2020;20(1):344.
79. Embrey JR Jr. How physicians can protect themselves from litigation
risk from virtual care. Medical Economics Journal. September 8, 2021.
Available at: https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/how-physicianscan-protect-themselves-from-litigation-risk-from-virtual-care. Accessed
September 19, 2022.
80. Gardner M, McVety D, eds. Treatment and care of the geriatric veterinary patient. 1st ed. John Wiley & Sons; 2017.
81. Goldberg ME, Tomlinson JE. Introduction to physical rehabilitation for
veterinary technicians/nurses. In: Physical rehabilitation for veterinary
technicians and nurses. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley Blackwell; 2018:1–10.

JAAHA.ORG

21

