Kitten Care

At a glance
Vaccinations
First: 6 – 8 weeks
Second: 10 – 12 weeks
Third: 14 – 16 weeks
Every year thereafter
Worming – Intestinal
Every two weeks until 12 weeks of age, then every
month until 6 months of age, then every three
months for life!
Heartworm Prevention
Start heartworm prevention before your kitten
reaches 12 weeks of age or at the time of her second
vaccination. There are products now available that
will cover your kitten for Heartworm, Fleas and
Intestinal Worms and its all in the one tube making
prevention from heartworm easy.
Flea Control
Start your kitten on flea control immediately. Fleas
breed fast so a good quality flea control product is
essential. A single adult female flea can lay around
50 eggs every day so one flea can turn into hundreds
before you know it. We will advise you on which
product is best for your kitten. Don't delay your flea
control!

Ticks
Ticks live in bushland areas but can be carried
through to suburban areas via possums and
bandicoots. Preventatives for cats are limited so we
will advise you on which one is best for your cat.
NEVER use dog products on your cat! Some contain
Permethrin which is perfectly safe for use on dogs
but can kill a cat. NEVER use dog products on your
cat!
Nutrition
Start feeding your kitten on a good quality dry food
the moment you get her home. These foods are
available at the practice. Although not essential, if
you would like to give your kitten milk, make sure it
is lactose free. Make sure fresh water is also available
at all times.
Desexing
Have your kitten desexed before 6 months of age. It
is from this age that your kitten will reach sexual
maturity and can get pregnant. Thousands of cats
and kittens are put to sleep every year in our refuges
due to lack of homes, so please desex your kitten
BEFORE 6 months of age so we don’t add to this
growing problem.

Essentials
Litter Tray
A litter tray is essential even if you are planning to have
an outdoor cat. You will have to keep your kitten
indoors until she is 3-4 months old for her own safety,
so a toilet is a necessity. Without a toilet, she will be
forced to make one on her own and you can bet she
will probably choose your doona or the clothes which
you left on the floor! There is a huge range of litter
trays available and can be purchased from the practice.
Kitty Litter
Cat litter is essential as cats naturally dig when they
toilet. It is for this reason that some people have
trouble with their cat digging up their favourite pot
plants. Cats can be fussy when it comes to litter so
don’t be surprised if you need to try several different
brands before you get one she is happy to use.
Toys
Kittens are very active so provide her with plenty of
toys to play with. Most cat toys are simple and
inexpensive. Make sure the toy is not small enough to
swallow but is small enough for your kitten to bat
around using her paws. Never give her wool to play
with! Pictures of cats with a big woolen ball look cute
but if they swallow the wool you might be looking at
surgery to remove it. Not so cute after all.
Treats
Yes, it is possible to train a cat. Liver treats are great for
cats but be careful not to give them too many as they
can get diarrhoea. Remember they are a treat so offer
them in moderation.
Collar
Get your kitten used to a collar now. When purchasing
a collar, ensure it has a safety catch or an elastic section
so it will come off safely should your cat become
entangled or caught on a branch etc while climbing.
Collars can cause serious damage to cats so a good
quality collar is essential. Most cat collars also have a
small bell attached to it to protect our precious wildlife
by alerting them when a cat pounces. If you insist on an
outdoor cat, a bell is essential for any collar for the
protection of our wildlife.
Food
A good quality dry food is best and is available through
the practice. Good quality dry foods are complete and

balanced for all your kitten’s needs. Some pet foods in
major chain stores may not be as balanced or meet all
of your kitten’s requirements, so we will advise you on
which food is best to ensure a healthy growing kitten.
History
Try and get as much history as possible about your
kitten and make sure you get all health records with
information such as worming tablets, vaccinations, flea
control, microchip etc. If you do not have access to this
information, it is best to assume nothing has been done
and start your kitten’s health regime from scratch. If
you are unsure at any time what you should be doing
for your kitten, call the practice and speak to one of our
staff. We are more than happy to explain your kitten's
health requirements.
Patience
Your kitten is going to make mistakes, please try to be
patient with her! Most of the 'naughty' things your
kitten is doing are natural feline behaviours. It is up to
you to teach your kitten right from wrong in the human
world and provide alternatives (scratching poles, toys
etc) to prevent these unwanted behaviours.
Bedding
Make sure you provide your kitten with something
warm & comfortable to sleep on and because fleas can
live and breed in bedding, make sure the bed is
washable so the fleas don't take over.
Scratching Pole
A scratching pole is essential for your kitten! The
scratching pole should be tall enough to allow your cat
to stretch up high and scratch. Low scratching posts can
easily be pulled over and don’t allow your cat to
naturally stretch.
Cat Carrier
A cat carrier is essential for any cat. They make trips to
the vet or cattery safe for you and other motorists on
the road and they make sure there are no escapees
outside the practice. Dogs cause stress for cats and
there is a very good chance there will be one at the vet
so for your safety it’s best you don’t come into the
practice holding your cat in your arms. They might be
loving and affectionate at home but a big barking dog
can trigger the fight or flight response in your cat and
you could get scratched badly.

Litter Training
Litter Tray Size
To toilet train your kitten you will need a litter tray.
Make sure the litter tray is not too deep or the kitten
will have trouble getting in and out of the tray.
Purchase a shallow tray now and when your kitten
grows up you can purchase a deeper tray if required.
Steer away from trays with hoods. They are designed
to keep the odour down but imagine how strong the
odour is inside the tray. Cats are clean animals, so you
many find they refuse to use it. Some cats can even
refuse to use a litter tray that they have soiled in once
already. Keep their trays clean!

Won't use the tray? Try the following:
ŸChange the litter type
ŸClean the tray more regularly
ŸChange the litter tray
ŸChange the litter tray position
ŸDon't use harsh chemicals
ŸProvide more litter trays

Litter Tray Position
Make sure the tray is situated in an easily accessible
place for your kitten, usually close to (but not right
next to) their bedding.

Not using a litter tray can also be a sign of a urinary
tract infection, so you should make an appointment to
make sure their inappropriate urination is not due to a
health problem.

Do not
ŸPlace the tray in a high traffic area like the
bathroom, kitchen or laundry. It is best to give your
kitten some privacy and the noises of washing
machines and flushing toilets can startle them
resulting in them not wanting to go back in that
room.
ŸPlace the litter tray where you plan to feed your
kitten as cats do not like to eat where they toilet.
Would you eat in the toilet?

If you notice your cat straining in the litter tray, contact
the practice immediately. They may have Feline Lower
Urinary Tract disease which can be fatal if left
untreated.

How Many Litter Trays?
You should have two litter trays for every cat in your
household as some cats will refuse to use a litter tray
another cat has used. Make sure the litter tray is clean
at all times as your kitten may not use the tray if it is
dirty.
What do I clean the litter tray with?
Regularly wash your kitten's tray with very hot water
or an enzyme based cleaner like Bio-Zet (which is a
laundry detergent) and stand it in the sun to dry. Do
not use harsh chemicals as sometimes cats will not use
the litter tray if it has a strong chemical smell.

What type of litter?
Some cats can be terribly fussy about what type of
litter they want to use so you may have to try a few
different types.

Scratching
Remember that your cat has been given claws for her
own safety and what does a cat do when in danger?
Climb a tree! How does she do this? With her claws!
A cat scratches for many reasons. Apart from keeping
the claws sharp to get out of harms way fast, she will
also scratch to leave her mark on the area using the
glands in her paws and her face. All that aside, it
doesn't make it acceptable for her to do this on your
best furniture.
So how can we avoid this?
Give her an appropriate item to scratch like a good
quality scratching post. The post must be tall enough
for your cat to get a full stretch (so approximately 1
meter tall) and be sturdy enough not to fall over under
your cat's weight. Place the scratching post near their
food or bedding and show your kitten how to use the
scratching post by rubbing her feet onto the post.
Putting a little 'cat nip' around the area and hanging a
few toys from your scratching post can also help.
She is scratching my furniture!
Now that you have read why she is scratching and you
understand this is natural feline behaviour, take a deep
breath and work with her doing the following:
Make your scratching post appealing
Ÿ Move the scratching post over to the area that she
is scratching (the couch for example) and make it as
appealing as possible.
Ÿ Play with her around the post using her toys, hang
the toys from the post, place cat nip around the
post and some tasty treats on top of the post, like
liver treats. This scratching post is much better to
use than the couch. Now, when your cat loves using
her scratching post move it back to the original
position and make your couch very unappealing.
You can pin some tin foil (aluminium foil),
bubblewrap, or double sided tape to the area
where your cat is scratching. Cats hate these
surfaces on their paws and with that fantastic
scratching post you provided, who would want to?

Can I cut her nails?
If your cat is a 100% indoor cat, then yes you can trim
her nails. Purchase some nail clippers from the practice
and we’ll show you how to cut them. It is not advisable
to cut the nails of an outdoor cat however as they
need their nails to escape from danger or to protect
themselves.

Biting
Like puppies, kittens can also bite. It is best not to
encourage your kitten to play with your hands or use
your hands in play sessions like pouncing on your
hand under the doona. The games your kitten grows
up with are the games that she will want to play
later on in life and while it may be cute now, an adult
cat pouncing onto a child or hanging off your clothes
is not funny.
Encourage play with your kitten using her toys (balls,
toys on string, fake mice etc) only and don't
encourage aggressive play like ruffing your kitten up.
If your kitten does get aggressive and bite you, hiss
at her and put her in 'time out' (an area where she is
isolated) for a couple of minutes. If it is a child, tell
your children to yell loudly and fall over, which will
let your kitten know that they just hurt their

playmate and teach her to be gentler in future.
Cats love playing as it teaches them all the skills
needed to hunt like running, pouncing, jumping and
hiding. These behaviours are learned at a young age
to prepare them for survival and although you may
have an indoor cat they still want to learn these skills
so it's important to play with them often. Just make
sure that you control the play session and the whole
family will enjoy the new kitten.
Note: Never give your kitten balls of string to play
with. If swallowed, they can cause a lot of
complications and sometimes need to be surgically
removed. Toys like the one pictured below are
perfect and children can play with the kitten using
one of these without being scratched. They keep
your arm at a distance and allow your cat to get
plenty of exercise and have lots of fun.

Indoor or Outdoor Cat?
Whether you have an indoor or outdoor cat, is a
decision that every cat owner will have to decide for
themselves but keep in mind that on average an indoor
cat will live twice as long as an outdoor cat.
Following is a brief summary of what to expect with an
indoor or outdoor cat. Hopefully, this will assist you
when making this decision.
INDOOR CAT
Contrary to what some people think, cats do not have
nine lives, they have only one and it is very precious! If
you decide on an indoor cat make sure you provide her
with plenty of stimulation like toys, a scratching post
and lots of high places for her to sit. She will also enjoy
some potted cat grass which you can buy from garden
centers. Apart from your cat enjoying every mouthful, it
will also aid in digestion. If you do not provide cat grass
she may start chewing your indoor plants and flowers,
some of which may be poisonous to her (like lilies).
Rotate her toys daily as she will soon get bored with
them if you leave them out all of the time. Cat toys are
inexpensive and if you use your imagination you can
even make some of your own! If your windowsills aren't
wide enough for your cat to sit on, you can now
purchase a clip on shelf which clips onto your
windowsill so your cat can get a bird's eye view of
what's happening outside.
If you cannot give your cat the attention she needs or if
you plan to leave her home alone for long periods of
the day then it may be kind to get two cats (as long as
you can financially afford two!). Although you may
provide your cat with plenty of stimulation, some cats
still want to go outside occasionally. If you want to let
your cat outside for brief periods, you can take her for a
walk on a cat harness so she can explore. Some cats
however have no interest whatsoever in going outside
and may prefer to sit at the window sunbaking all day.
An even better option than a harness is a cat enclosure
which can be fitted to any home, allowing your cat to
get fresh air and sunshine as well as keeping her safe.
Enclosures are custom built and designed for your
property and can even be built around existing trees
and shrubs so don't worry about your beautiful garden.
For those who are renting, there is a portable enclosure
available so you can take it with you if you move. You
should have your indoor cat for 10-20 years, so an

enclosure is a small investment to make. Remember
that indoor cats usually cost less as they are at a much
lower risk of disease and injury, so an enclosure would
be a nice gift to thank her for saving you all that money!
Indoor cats are also protected from being hit by cars,
attacked by dogs, being beaten up by the local cat bully
or contracting Feline Aids or Leukaemia. Just make sure
you provide her with plenty of stimulation and she
won’t mind being kept indoors.
OUTDOOR
Outdoor cats have shorter lives, are at a much greater
risk of disease and injury and are generally more
expensive to own. If outdoor is your decision however,
there are a few steps to take in order to keep her as safe
as you can.
ŸCat fights break out over territory disputes and
usually occur at dusk and at dawn, so make sure
your cat is inside during these times.
ŸMake sure you have your cat vaccinated to protect
her from disease.
ŸCats have no road sense at all and if they are lucky to
survive being hit by a car don't think that they will
learn from it. They won't! If you live on a busy road
or street do not have an outdoor cat as there is little
advice we can give you on how to keep her safe.
Outdoor cats injure themselves more so make sure
you are prepared for the veterinary bills from her
medical treatment. Pet Insurance is essential for all
cats but particularly for outdoor cats.

Vaccinations
New kittens need a lot of attention in the health
department and things can get terribly confusing but
when you know the importance of all these injections it
makes it easier to follow.
First, how to read your vaccination card.
The first vaccination is usually given at 6-8 weeks and
you will notice it says F3. All this means is 'Feline Three
Viruses' and those three viruses are Enteritis,
Rhinotracheitis and Calicivirus. Easy!
Your second vaccination will then be given at 10-12
weeks of age and you will need another F3 vaccination.
Your final kitten vaccination is then due at 14-16 weeks
of age and you will need another F3. Vaccinations are
then given every 12months after their 14-16 week
needle (so your cat will now be approximately 16
months old).
We may also recommend you vaccinate your cat against
Chlamydia, Leukaemia and/or Feline Aids. We will advise
you further during your consultation.
Q Why only give an F3 for the first needle?
A - It is only necessary to vaccinate against Leukaemia
and Chlamydia viruses twice and not three times like the
other viruses, however this can change depending on
the vaccine so we will advise you.
Q Can the vaccination schedule differ from above?
A - YES! The above schedule is the most common one
used, however, this can change depending on a number
of things – where you live and the brand of vaccine used
are just two factors which can influence a vaccination
schedule. It is always best to stick to the schedule your
veterinarian recommends. If you don't understand –
please ask us to clarify. We are here to help you.
Q - I have been told that I should keep my kitten inside
until she has had all her needles.
A - Good! Then you have been steered in the right
direction. Your kitten will not be fully immunized until
after her third vaccination, so for her safety, it is best to
keep her confined to the safety of the house until she is
fully immunized. It is simply not worth the risk.
Q Why do I need to give my kitten a 'booster'

A – A 'booster' shot is a term used for a follow up
vaccination. It simply means another F5 (the same
vaccination you had last time). The reason you get it
again twelve months from the date of your final kitten
vaccination is that your kittens immunity against these
horrible diseases will now start to weaken thus putting
her at risk. This yearly vaccination visit also gives you a
chance to discuss any health issues with your
veterinarian and make sure not only is your pet healthy,
but you're up to date with all of her needs. Your kitten
has only you to rely on for her health, so please continue
to protect her by ensuring you vaccinate every year.
Q How do these diseases affect my kitten?
Ÿ Enteritis
Recovery rate – Sometimes death may occur without
them showing any clinical signs.
Ÿ Rhinotracheitis & Calicivirus (Cat Flu)
Recovery rate – High but cats who do recover will carry
the disease for long periods of time.
Ÿ Leukaemia
Recovery Rate – Around one third of infected cats
remain infected and continue to spread the virus to
other cats.
Ÿ Chlamydia
Recovery Rate – Can be shed to other cats for many
months after treatment.
Ÿ FIV (Feline Aids)

Recovery Rate – Severely affects the immune system in
a similar way to human Aids leaving your cat more
susceptible to other disease. Feline Aids is spread from
direct contact with other cats. Feline Aids is NOT
transmissible to humans.

Heartworm Disease

Intestinal Worming

While most people are aware of heartworm in dogs,
many cat owners are unaware that cats too, get
heartworm. Heartworm is spread by mosquitoes, so
even if you have an indoor cat she should be on
heartworm prevention. Mosquitoes can get into a
house quite easily!

Worms have serious health effects on kittens and in
more severe cases cause death, so intestinal worming
should never be underestimated. Intestinal worming
should not be confused with heartworm as
mosquitoes spread heartworm and intestinal
worming is usually transmitted via faeces (poo) or via
the kitten's mother.

Heartworm is a parasite which attaches itself to
arteries in the heart causing heart and lung disease
and death (the disease is passed on by the mosquito
as they feed from your cat). Only one bite from an
infected mosquito can pass on heartworm to your cat
and unlike dogs, it only takes one worm to make your
cat very ill. Some cats with heartworm don't even
show any signs of illness and can die without warning.
Heartworms take around 8 months to mature to adult
size and when matured make their way to the heart.
Due to their resistance, cats are usually only infected
with a small number of heartworm (remember it
takes only 1 to kill your cat). Cats do not tolerate
heartworm infection well, so prevention is the best
option.
There are many different types of preventatives
available so we will advise you on which product is
most suitable for your cat.
Remember: Wherever there are mosquitoes there is
heartworm disease. It is recommended that your
kitten start on a preventative by twelve weeks of age
and to continue on the preventative for the rest of
her life. If you do not continue this prevention, she
will be at risk.

As intestinal worms can have very harmful effects on
both your kitten and your family, make sure you use a
good quality wormer. This is not an area where you
should pick up something cheap and ineffective. Do it
once, do it right.
The times you worm your kitten will change
depending upon her age. Your kitten should be
wormed
ŸEvery two weeks until 12 weeks of age; then
ŸEvery month until 6 months of age, then
ŸEvery three months for life.
Monthly ‘spot on’ formulas make life easy as they
include Heartworm prevention, Flea Control and
Intestinal Worming all in the one tube. We will advise
you on which product is best for your kitten.

Fleas

Microchipping
Flea control should be started the
moment your pet comes home as
fleas can breed and get out of hand
very quickly. Don't wait for an
outbreak to occur, prevention is
always better than cure.

Most monthly flea control products can be started
from as young as 9 weeks and application is so easy.
The most effective flea control are monthly 'spot on'
formulas. You simply pour the small amount of liquid
from the pipette onto the back of your kitten’s neck
and she will be protected against fleas for a whole
month.
If you have a dog, don’t forget to protect them also.
If you don’t protect the dog or vice versa, one pet
will be breeding them while the other is killing them.
You will never get rid of the fleas this way. All pets
need to be on a good flea control product to keep
your environment flea free.
Flea facts
ŸFleas are a very common cause of allergic skin
disease
ŸFleas are a problem all year but mainly in the
warmer months
ŸFleas are the cause of the flea tapeworm, the
most common intestinal worms seen by vets.
ŸA very small percentage of fleas will be seen on
your pet, most fleas live in your environment like
the back yard and carpet.
ŸPeople can be bitten by fleas too. You will rarely
see them but they can leave an itchy sore, much
like a mosquito bite. You don't have to see the
fleas to know they have been there, just watch
your pet scratch.
ŸIf you can't see your pet scratching then maybe
you are! Flea eggs can fall off your cat and into
your bed and furniture leaving you with a flea
problem also. Flea free cat, flea free home.
Simple really isn't it?
We have an e-book all about Fleas if you would like
to read more about them. Please ask us to email this
book to you if you are interested.

A microchip is the most effective form of
identification for your pet. A microchip is the size of a
grain of rice and holds a number exclusively for your
pet. It is implanted under the skin in between your
pet’s shoulder blades and remains there for life. It's
as simple as getting any other injection and only
takes a few minutes.
Losing a pet is heartbreaking and even if you have an
indoor cat it is as simple as someone leaving the door
open for them to get out and get lost. How will your
cat get home? Name tags on collars are effective but
what happens if your cat wasn't wearing their collar
or the collar slips off? Your cat will never leave home
without their microchip!
The database which hold your personal details
operates 24 hours a day, 365 days a year so your pet
can be reunited with you at any time of the day or
night. Your pet's microchip number will never change
but if you move or change your phone number, you
will need to update your contact details on the
database.
What if your pet was hit by a car? They will be taken
to the nearest vet or emergency hospital but who
will give permission for particular treatments? If your
pet has a microchip we can contact you even if it's
2am, notify you of the accident, and discuss their
treatment. Microchips are inexpensive and are a one
off cost. What price can you put on your pet
returning home to you?
Note: Microchips are compulsory in some states. We
will advise on the legislation for this state.

Ticks

Desexing

Ticks are found near bushland areas and can be
carried further inland by native animals including
possums and bandicoots. The paralysis tick which is
grey in appearance, affects your pet by injecting a
deadly toxin which causes paralysis of the limbs (ie
losing strength in the hind limbs) and eventually
death.

If you decide to breed your pet, we strongly suggest
you do some research first, as breeding can be very
expensive and time consuming.
Have you...
ŸConsidered the cost should your cat have any
birthing difficulties?
ŸConsidered, or set aside the time?
ŸConsidered that you will be feeding the kittens
every two hours if your cat is unable to feed
them?
ŸConsidered the cost of worming, vaccinations,
flea control and food when they are weaned?
ŸPut some funds aside in case some of the kittens
become ill and need veterinary attention?
ŸFound good homes for the kittens?
ŸGot some spare time to toilet train the kittens?

Symptoms to watch for are loss of co-ordination in
the hind limbs (drunken appearance), change in
voice, gagging, coughing, vomiting, difficulty
breathing and depression. Recovery rates depend on
how quickly your pet is treated. Prevention is once
again better than cure so we will advise you on the
best preventative to use.
If you think your pet is showing symptoms of tick
paralysis, contact us immediately for advice. Do not
wait to 'see how it goes' as your pet will not recover
without treatment.
Common Myths about ticks
Q What will happen if I pull off the tick and leave
the head in?
A Its fine! Ticks do not have a head, only mouth
parts and the toxin is contained in the body. Leaving
the mouth parts only acts as a splinter and nothing
more.
Q Should I spray it with an insecticide before
removal?
A Spraying ticks before attempting to remove them is
not essential.
Q Should I wait until I see the vet before removing
the tick?
A No, the tick should be removed immediately to
stop toxicity. Simply grasp the body of the tick as
close to the skin as possible with your fingers, and
pull the tick straight out. It is best to keep the tick
and bring it into the practice for identification.

It is recommended that you have your kitten
desexed before 6 months of age (for both male and
female cats). It is at this age that your kitten will
reach sexual maturity.
Reasons to desex your male cat
Cats not desexed will wander much greater distances
thus increasing their risk of being hit by car. Cats not
desexed also 'spray' (pee) on surfaces to mark their
territory. This surface could be your couch or kitchen
cupboards and if you have ever smelt the urine of an
entire male cat, that would be enough reason on it's
own to desex him! Cats not desexed will have a
stronger desire to protect their territory meaning
they will get into more cat fights. Cat fights cause cat
fight abscesses and therefore more veterinary bills!
Male cats are 50% responsible for our serious
overpopulation problem in this country.
Reasons to desex your female cat
Cats not desexed will 'call' to other male cats in the
area to let them know they are ready to mate. This
means your cat will howl at all hours of the morning
keeping you awake. We have a severe
overpopulation problem in this country resulting in
thousands of cats being put to sleep every year due
to lack of homes. Please don’t add to this problem.

Nutrition
THE MOST COMMON NUTRITION QUESTIONS
ANSWERED
Q – Should I keep my cat on the same food the
breeder/pet shop is feeding?
A – A sudden change in diet can give your kitten
diarrhoea, so always try to slowly wean your kitten off
the food they are eating now and onto your preferred
food. You can do this by gradually adding in the new
food and reducing her old food until she is totally eating
your preferred food. Your kitten may still get diarrhea
due to stress caused by the change in environment but
it should only ever be mild. If diarrhea persists longer
than 24 hours, or is severe, contact us immediately for
advice.
Q – What should I feed my kitten?
A – It is very important to feed your kitten a good
quality dry food, as their nutritional requirements are
greater than that of an adult cat. Like people, cats need
a balanced diet and a premium dry food from the
practice will deliver just that.
Q – What is the difference between the food at the vet
and food at the supermarket?
A – Quality. Premium foods sold in practice guarantee
their ingredients. What this means is if the cat food is
'chicken' then it will always contain a specified amount
of chicken no matter how high the price of chicken is at
the time of production. Premium foods also do not
contain less digestible protein which exists in some
supermarket products.
Q – Why do cats have to eat more meat than dogs?
A – To remain healthy, cats require animal protein
which contains a particular amino acid called Taurine.
Taurine helps prevent heart and eye disease and while
there is plenty of it in animal protein it is only present
in small amounts of plant protein. While dogs can
manufacture Taurine within their body, a cat can only
manufacture a little and is not enough to meet their
needs so the shortfall of this amino acid must be made
up in their diet. This is the reason a dog could be fed a
properly balanced vegetarian diet and a cat could not.
Cat food should always have Taurine present so check
the labels.

Q - Should I give my kitten milk?
A – No, it is not necessary providing your kitten is on a
good quality kitten food. Some kittens can be lactose
intolerant so the milk we drink can give them diarrhoea.
Q – How often should I feed my kitten
A – Kittens have very small stomachs and should be fed
3-4 times a day (if possible). As their energy
requirements are very high it is best to leave out some
dry kibble for them during the day if you plan on leaving
the house for a long period of time. If you feed moist
food or can food, only leave it down for a maximum of 1
hour. If it has not been eaten decrease the amount you
offer your kitten next time.
Q – How long should she stay on kitten food?
A – Keep your kitten on kitten food until she is about 6
months of age. From 6 months of age you can feed her
an adult food. Some diets suggest you change them to
an adult food as soon as they are desexed.
Q – How do I look after her teeth?
A – There are also some premium dry cat foods which
have been specially designed to clean her teeth. They
are commonly called ‘Dental Diets’. These diets are
suitable to feed after desexing or after 6 months of age.
You can also clean her teeth yourself using a tooth
brush and toothpaste kit from the practice. Do not use
human toothpaste as it can make her sick!

Pet Insurance
Unfortunately we can't claim our pets on medicare so
it is important when purchasing a pet that you
consider the cost of veterinary bills should they
become ill or be involved in an accident.
A wound from a cat fight or injury from climbing a
fence, which requires stitches, can sometimes be in
excess of $300 and if your cat is lucky to survive being
hit by a car, their treatment can be over $1,000.
Owning a pet carries a lot of responsibility and one of
those is to pay for her medical bills, so be prepared.
Our government heavily subsidises human drugs and
surgical procedures which means you don’t pay full
price when you visit your own doctor. Our furry
friends do not have their own government so their
drugs and treatments are not subsidized. It is for this
reason that veterinary bills can appear to be more
expensive.
Pet insurance is a growing industry in Australia but
sadly there are still only around 2% of dog and cat
owners who have their pets insured. In the UK,
around 26% of pet owners have pet insurance.
Australia has still got a long way to go before it has an
acceptable number of pet owners who are insured!

Pets who are insured generally get much better
health care than pets who are not insured, due to the
fact that money is not an issue when it comes to their
treatment plans. It is very frustrating for
veterinarians to have to offer a lower standard of care
due to the pet owner not having enough funds.
The worst thing however is the pain that some pet
owners have to go through when they must make a
decision to euthanise their pet as they can’t afford
their medical treatment. Sadly, these decisions have
to be made and there are no winners. The family are
devastated, the veterinary personnel are devastated
and an animal will lose its life for something that was
treatable. This situation is avoidable with pet
insurance.
Good pet insurance cover is usually between $35 $55 per month and some policies cover you for 100%
of your veterinary bills. If you would have trouble
paying for your pet’s emergency treatment then pet
insurance is a must. Your cat relies on you to take care
of her so please make sure you are ready should she
urgently need you.
Please take out pet insurance cover today. It’s very
important.

Introducing your kitten...
Introducing your kitten to your existing cat
Like most humans, cats hate change. Even the
smallest changes like moving the furniture around can
be stressful, so be patient with your existing cat when
introducing the new kitten.
When bringing your kitten home, set her up in a room
on her own for a few days with her litter tray, bed,
toys, food and water and don't introduce her to your
existing cat straight away. It is highly likely that your
existing cat will not like the invasion of the new kitten
so confining your kitten will make your existing cat
curious and not furious!
Rubbing a towel on the existing cat then rubbing the
same towel on the kitten and then again back on the
existing cat can blend their smells and make the kitten
appear less of an alien. After these few steps you are
ready for your introduction.
Open the door to the room your kitten has been in
and let them introduce each other (don't force it!).
Humans must take a back seat here so sit back and let
the cats communicate in their own language. You will
undoubtedly hear some hissing and spitting but you
must allow this to happen as it is natural
communication between cats and you must let them
speak their mind. Interference here by you will only
confuse things and the settling in period will be
prolonged. Introductions don't always go well the first
time so if it doesn't go well separate them and start
over. Most cats under 6 months of age will bond
quickly and permanently but older cats can take a lot
longer. Be patient with them and don't expect too
much too quickly.

Introducing your kitten to your dog
Introducing the dog is a litter bit easier than
introducing the existing cat and if done properly, they
should be good friends. When introducing the new
kitten, make sure your dog is on lead so you are in
control of the situation. This will take away the dog's
natural instinct to chase if the kitten runs away and
hides or climbs up somewhere high to observe.
Once the kitten realizes that the dog is welcome to be
in the house or yard she will soon come to terms with

it. Most kittens learn to adore the family dog and be
very excepting of their new friend. During the
introductory period, the dog may get a few swipes to
the nose from the kitten but rarely any serious
damage but beware the dog if he forces the cat into a
corner! He will soon learn the cat rules very painfully.
Ouch!
Introducing your kitten to you baby
This one is the hardest of all as cats do not see babies
as little people. When introducing your cat to your
baby, it is important to supervise it at all times.
Contrary to what some people think, cats do not
smother babies. They are merely looking for a warm
place to snooze and a cot delivers just that, a warm,
soft and high place to snooze the day away. Provide
this for your cat and she will more than likely prefer to
use this area over the cot as babies move too much
and this does not impress cats!
Make sure that at all times your cat has an escape
route if the children get too noisy and boisterous.
Anywhere that small children can't reach.

